 [﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Emma, by Jane AustenThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever]
 [You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: EmmaAuthor: Jane AustenRelease Date: August, 1994  [Etext #158]Posting Date: January 21, 2010Language: English*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMMA ***Produced by An Anonymous VolunteerEMMABy Jane AustenVOLUME ICHAPTER IEmma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable homeand happy disposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings ofexistence; and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with verylittle to distress or vex her.She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate,indulgent father; and had, in consequence of her sister's marriage, beenmistress of his house from a very early period. Her mother had diedtoo long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance ofher caresses; and her place had been supplied by an excellent woman asgoverness, who had fallen little short of a mother in affection.Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr. Woodhouse's family, less as agoverness than a friend, very fond of both daughters, but particularlyof Emma. Between _them_ it was more the intimacy of sisters. Even beforeMiss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess, themildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint;and the shadow of authority being now long passed away, they had beenliving together as friend and friend very mutually attached, and Emmadoing just what she liked; highly esteeming Miss Taylor's judgment, butdirected chiefly by her own.The real evils, indeed, of Emma's situation were the power of havingrather too much her own way, and a disposition to think a little toowell of herself; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy toher many enjoyments. The danger, however, was at present so unperceived,that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes with her.Sorrow came--a gentle sorrow--but not at all in the shape of anydisagreeable consciousness.--Miss Taylor married. It was Miss Taylor'sloss which first brought grief. It was on the wedding-day of thisbeloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of anycontinuance. The wedding over, and the bride-people gone, her father andherself were left to dine together, with no prospect of a third to cheera long evening. Her father composed himself to sleep after dinner, asusual, and she had then only to sit and think of what she had lost.The event had every promise of happiness for her friend. Mr. Westonwas a man of unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age, andpleasant manners; and there was some satisfaction in consideringwith what self-denying, generous friendship she had always wished andpromoted the match; but it was a black morning's work for her. The wantof Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day. She recalled herpast kindness--the kindness, the affection of sixteen years--how she hadtaught and how she had played with her from five years old--how she haddevoted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health--and hownursed her through the various illnesses of childhood. A large debt ofgratitude was owing here; but the intercourse of the last sevenyears, the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followedIsabella's marriage, on their being left to each other, was yet adearer, tenderer recollection. She had been a friend and companion suchas few possessed: intelligent, well-informed, useful, gentle, knowingall the ways of the family, interested in all its concerns, andpeculiarly interested in herself, in every pleasure, every scheme ofhers--one to whom she could speak every thought as it arose, and who hadsuch an affection for her as could never find fault.How was she to bear the change?--It was true that her friend was goingonly half a mile from them; but Emma was aware that great must be thedifference between a Mrs. Weston, only half a mile from them, and a MissTaylor in the house; and with all her advantages, natural and domestic,she was now in great danger of suffering from intellectual solitude. Shedearly loved her father, but he was no companion for her. He could notmeet her in conversation, rational or playful.The evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and Mr. Woodhouse hadnot married early) was much increased by his constitution and habits;for having been a valetudinarian all his life, without activity ofmind or body, he was a much older man in ways than in years; and thougheverywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heart and his amiabletemper, his talents could not have recommended him at any time.Her sister, though comparatively but little removed by matrimony, beingsettled in London, only sixteen miles off, was much beyond her dailyreach; and many a long October and November evening must be struggledthrough at Hartfield, before Christmas brought the next visit fromIsabella and her husband, and their little children, to fill the house,and give her pleasant society again.Highbury, the large and populous village, almost amounting to a town,to which Hartfield, in spite of its separate lawn, and shrubberies, andname, did really belong, afforded her no equals. The Woodhouseswere first in consequence there. All looked up to them. She had manyacquaintance in the place, for her father was universally civil, butnot one among them who could be accepted in lieu of Miss Taylor for evenhalf a day. It was a melancholy change; and Emma could not but sigh overit, and wish for impossible things, till her father awoke, and made itnecessary to be cheerful. His spirits required support. He was a nervousman, easily depressed; fond of every body that he was used to, andhating to part with them; hating change of every kind. Matrimony, as theorigin of change, was always disagreeable; and he was by no means yetreconciled to his own daughter's marrying, nor could ever speak of herbut with compassion, though it had been entirely a match of affection,when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor too; and from hishabits of gentle selfishness, and of being never able to suppose thatother people could feel differently from himself, he was very muchdisposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for herself as forthem, and would have been a great deal happier if she had spent all therest of her life at Hartfield. Emma smiled and chatted as cheerfullyas she could, to keep him from such thoughts; but when tea came, it wasimpossible for him not to say exactly as he had said at dinner,"Poor Miss Taylor!--I wish she were here again. What a pity it is thatMr. Weston ever thought of her!""I cannot agree with you, papa; you know I cannot. Mr. Weston is sucha good-humoured, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deservesa good wife;--and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us forever, and bear all my odd humours, when she might have a house of herown?""A house of her own!--But where is the advantage of a house of her own?This is three times as large.--And you have never any odd humours, mydear]
 ["How often we shall be going to see them, and they coming to see us!--Weshall be always meeting! _We_ must begin; we must go and pay weddingvisit very soon]
 ["My dear, how am I to get so far? Randalls is such a distance. I couldnot walk half so far]
 ["No, papa, nobody thought of your walking. We must go in the carriage,to be sure]
 ["The carriage! But James will not like to put the horses to for such alittle way;--and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying ourvisit?""They are to be put into Mr. Weston's stable, papa. You know we havesettled all that already. We talked it all over with Mr. Weston lastnight. And as for James, you may be very sure he will always like goingto Randalls, because of his daughter's being housemaid there. I onlydoubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else. That was your doing,papa. You got Hannah that good place. Nobody thought of Hannah till youmentioned her--James is so obliged to you!""I am very glad I did think of her. It was very lucky, for I would nothave had poor James think himself slighted upon any account; and I amsure she will make a very good servant: she is a civil, pretty-spokengirl; I have a great opinion of her. Whenever I see her, she alwayscurtseys and asks me how I do, in a very pretty manner; and when youhave had her here to do needlework, I observe she always turns the lockof the door the right way and never bangs it. I am sure she will be anexcellent servant; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylorto have somebody about her that she is used to see. Whenever James goesover to see his daughter, you know, she will be hearing of us. He willbe able to tell her how we all are]
 [Emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideas, andhoped, by the help of backgammon, to get her father tolerablythrough the evening, and be attacked by no regrets but her own. Thebackgammon-table was placed; but a visitor immediately afterwards walkedin and made it unnecessary.Mr. Knightley, a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty, was notonly a very old and intimate friend of the family, but particularlyconnected with it, as the elder brother of Isabella's husband. He livedabout a mile from Highbury, was a frequent visitor, and always welcome,and at this time more welcome than usual, as coming directly from theirmutual connexions in London. He had returned to a late dinner, aftersome days' absence, and now walked up to Hartfield to say that all werewell in Brunswick Square. It was a happy circumstance, and animatedMr. Woodhouse for some time. Mr. Knightley had a cheerful manner, whichalways did him good; and his many inquiries after "poor Isabella" andher children were answered most satisfactorily. When this was over, Mr.Woodhouse gratefully observed, "It is very kind of you, Mr. Knightley,to come out at this late hour to call upon us. I am afraid you must havehad a shocking walk]
 ["Not at all, sir. It is a beautiful moonlight night; and so mild that Imust draw back from your great fire]
 ["But you must have found it very damp and dirty. I wish you may notcatch cold]
 ["Dirty, sir! Look at my shoes. Not a speck on them]
 ["Well! that is quite surprising, for we have had a vast deal of rainhere. It rained dreadfully hard for half an hour while we were atbreakfast. I wanted them to put off the wedding]
 ["By the bye--I have not wished you joy. Being pretty well aware of whatsort of joy you must both be feeling, I have been in no hurry with mycongratulations; but I hope it all went off tolerably well. How did youall behave? Who cried most?""Ah! poor Miss Taylor! 'Tis a sad business]
 ["Poor Mr. and Miss Woodhouse, if you please; but I cannot possibly say'poor Miss Taylor]
 [ I have a great regard for you and Emma; but when itcomes to the question of dependence or independence!--At any rate, itmust be better to have only one to please than two]
 ["Especially when _one_ of those two is such a fanciful, troublesomecreature!" said Emma playfully. "That is what you have in your head, Iknow--and what you would certainly say if my father were not by]
 ["I believe it is very true, my dear, indeed," said Mr. Woodhouse, with asigh. "I am afraid I am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome]
 ["My dearest papa! You do not think I could mean _you_, or suppose Mr.Knightley to mean _you_. What a horrible idea! Oh no! I meant onlymyself. Mr. Knightley loves to find fault with me, you know--in ajoke--it is all a joke. We always say what we like to one another]
 [Mr. Knightley, in fact, was one of the few people who could see faultsin Emma Woodhouse, and the only one who ever told her of them: andthough this was not particularly agreeable to Emma herself, she knewit would be so much less so to her father, that she would not have himreally suspect such a circumstance as her not being thought perfect byevery body]
 [Emma knows I never flatter her," said Mr. Knightley, "but I meant noreflection on any body. Miss Taylor has been used to have two personsto please; she will now have but one. The chances are that she must be againer]
 ["Well," said Emma, willing to let it pass--"you want to hear aboutthe wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you, for we all behavedcharmingly. Every body was punctual, every body in their best looks: nota tear, and hardly a long face to be seen. Oh no; we all felt that wewere going to be only half a mile apart, and were sure of meeting everyday]
 ["Dear Emma bears every thing so well," said her father. "But, Mr.Knightley, she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor, and I amsure she _will_ miss her more than she thinks for]
 [Emma turned away her head, divided between tears and smiles. "Itis impossible that Emma should not miss such a companion," said Mr.Knightley. "We should not like her so well as we do, sir, if we couldsuppose it; but she knows how much the marriage is to Miss Taylor'sadvantage; she knows how very acceptable it must be, at Miss Taylor'stime of life, to be settled in a home of her own, and how important toher to be secure of a comfortable provision, and therefore cannot allowherself to feel so much pain as pleasure. Every friend of Miss Taylormust be glad to have her so happily married]
 ["And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me," said Emma, "and a veryconsiderable one--that I made the match myself. I made the match, youknow, four years ago; and to have it take place, and be proved in theright, when so many people said Mr. Weston would never marry again, maycomfort me for any thing]
 [Mr. Knightley shook his head at her. Her father fondly replied, "Ah!my dear, I wish you would not make matches and foretell things, forwhatever you say always comes to pass. Pray do not make any morematches]
 ["I promise you to make none for myself, papa; but I must, indeed, forother people. It is the greatest amusement in the world! And after suchsuccess, you know!--Every body said that Mr. Weston would never marryagain. Oh dear, no! Mr. Weston, who had been a widower so long, and whoseemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife, so constantly occupiedeither in his business in town or among his friends here, alwaysacceptable wherever he went, always cheerful--Mr. Weston need not spenda single evening in the year alone if he did not like it. Oh no! Mr.Weston certainly would never marry again. Some people even talked of apromise to his wife on her deathbed, and others of the son and theuncle not letting him. All manner of solemn nonsense was talked on thesubject, but I believed none of it]
 [Ever since the day--about four years ago--that Miss Taylor and I metwith him in Broadway Lane, when, because it began to drizzle, he dartedaway with so much gallantry, and borrowed two umbrellas for us fromFarmer Mitchell's, I made up my mind on the subject. I planned the matchfrom that hour; and when such success has blessed me in this instance,dear papa, you cannot think that I shall leave off match-making]
 ["I do not understand what you mean by 'success,'" said Mr. Knightley]
 [Success supposes endeavour. Your time has been properly and delicatelyspent, if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bringabout this marriage. A worthy employment for a young lady's mind! Butif, which I rather imagine, your making the match, as you call it, meansonly your planning it, your saying to yourself one idle day, 'I think itwould be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr. Weston were to marryher,' and saying it again to yourself every now and then afterwards, whydo you talk of success? Where is your merit? What are you proud of? Youmade a lucky guess; and _that_ is all that can be said]
 ["And have you never known the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guess?--Ipity you.--I thought you cleverer--for, depend upon it a lucky guess isnever merely luck. There is always some talent in it. And as to mypoor word 'success,' which you quarrel with, I do not know that I am soentirely without any claim to it. You have drawn two pretty pictures;but I think there may be a third--a something between the do-nothing andthe do-all. If I had not promoted Mr. Weston's visits here, and givenmany little encouragements, and smoothed many little matters, it mightnot have come to any thing after all. I think you must know Hartfieldenough to comprehend that]
 ["A straightforward, open-hearted man like Weston, and a rational,unaffected woman like Miss Taylor, may be safely left to manage theirown concerns. You are more likely to have done harm to yourself, thangood to them, by interference]
 ["Emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good to others," rejoinedMr. Woodhouse, understanding but in part. "But, my dear, pray do notmake any more matches; they are silly things, and break up one's familycircle grievously]
 ["Only one more, papa; only for Mr. Elton. Poor Mr. Elton! You like Mr.Elton, papa,--I must look about for a wife for him. There is nobody inHighbury who deserves him--and he has been here a whole year, and hasfitted up his house so comfortably, that it would be a shame to have himsingle any longer--and I thought when he was joining their hands to-day,he looked so very much as if he would like to have the same kind officedone for him! I think very well of Mr. Elton, and this is the only way Ihave of doing him a service]
 ["Mr. Elton is a very pretty young man, to be sure, and a very good youngman, and I have a great regard for him. But if you want to shew him anyattention, my dear, ask him to come and dine with us some day. That willbe a much better thing. I dare say Mr. Knightley will be so kind as tomeet him]
 ["With a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time," said Mr. Knightley,laughing, "and I agree with you entirely, that it will be a much betterthing. Invite him to dinner, Emma, and help him to the best of the fishand the chicken, but leave him to chuse his own wife. Depend upon it, aman of six or seven-and-twenty can take care of himself]
 [CHAPTER IIMr. Weston was a native of Highbury, and born of a respectable family,which for the last two or three generations had been rising intogentility and property. He had received a good education, but, onsucceeding early in life to a small independence, had become indisposedfor any of the more homely pursuits in which his brothers were engaged,and had satisfied an active, cheerful mind and social temper by enteringinto the militia of his county, then embodied.Captain Weston was a general favourite; and when the chances of hismilitary life had introduced him to Miss Churchill, of a great Yorkshirefamily, and Miss Churchill fell in love with him, nobody was surprized,except her brother and his wife, who had never seen him, and who werefull of pride and importance, which the connexion would offend.Miss Churchill, however, being of age, and with the full command of herfortune--though her fortune bore no proportion to the family-estate--wasnot to be dissuaded from the marriage, and it took place, to theinfinite mortification of Mr. and Mrs. Churchill, who threw her off withdue decorum. It was an unsuitable connexion, and did not produce muchhappiness. Mrs. Weston ought to have found more in it, for she had ahusband whose warm heart and sweet temper made him think every thing dueto her in return for the great goodness of being in love with him;but though she had one sort of spirit, she had not the best. She hadresolution enough to pursue her own will in spite of her brother,but not enough to refrain from unreasonable regrets at that brother'sunreasonable anger, nor from missing the luxuries of her former home.They lived beyond their income, but still it was nothing in comparisonof Enscombe: she did not cease to love her husband, but she wanted atonce to be the wife of Captain Weston, and Miss Churchill of Enscombe.Captain Weston, who had been considered, especially by the Churchills,as making such an amazing match, was proved to have much the worst ofthe bargain; for when his wife died, after a three years' marriage, hewas rather a poorer man than at first, and with a child to maintain.From the expense of the child, however, he was soon relieved. The boyhad, with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of hismother's, been the means of a sort of reconciliation; and Mr. and Mrs.Churchill, having no children of their own, nor any other young creatureof equal kindred to care for, offered to take the whole charge of thelittle Frank soon after her decease. Some scruples and some reluctancethe widower-father may be supposed to have felt; but as they wereovercome by other considerations, the child was given up to the care andthe wealth of the Churchills, and he had only his own comfort to seek,and his own situation to improve as he could.A complete change of life became desirable. He quitted the militia andengaged in trade, having brothers already established in a good way inLondon, which afforded him a favourable opening. It was a concern whichbrought just employment enough. He had still a small house in Highbury,where most of his leisure days were spent; and between useful occupationand the pleasures of society, the next eighteen or twenty years of hislife passed cheerfully away. He had, by that time, realised an easycompetence--enough to secure the purchase of a little estate adjoiningHighbury, which he had always longed for--enough to marry a woman asportionless even as Miss Taylor, and to live according to the wishes ofhis own friendly and social disposition.It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence hisschemes; but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth,it had not shaken his determination of never settling till he couldpurchase Randalls, and the sale of Randalls was long looked forward to;but he had gone steadily on, with these objects in view, till they wereaccomplished. He had made his fortune, bought his house, and obtainedhis wife; and was beginning a new period of existence, with everyprobability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through. He hadnever been an unhappy man; his own temper had secured him from that,even in his first marriage; but his second must shew him how delightfula well-judging and truly amiable woman could be, and must give him thepleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to bechosen, to excite gratitude than to feel it.He had only himself to please in his choice: his fortune was his own;for as to Frank, it was more than being tacitly brought up as hisuncle's heir, it had become so avowed an adoption as to have him assumethe name of Churchill on coming of age. It was most unlikely, therefore,that he should ever want his father's assistance. His father had noapprehension of it. The aunt was a capricious woman, and governed herhusband entirely; but it was not in Mr. Weston's nature to imagine thatany caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear, and, as hebelieved, so deservedly dear. He saw his son every year in London, andwas proud of him; and his fond report of him as a very fine young manhad made Highbury feel a sort of pride in him too. He was looked on assufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits and prospects akind of common concern.Mr. Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury, and a livelycuriosity to see him prevailed, though the compliment was so littlereturned that he had never been there in his life. His coming to visithis father had been often talked of but never achieved.Now, upon his father's marriage, it was very generally proposed, as amost proper attention, that the visit should take place. There was not adissentient voice on the subject, either when Mrs. Perry drank tea withMrs. and Miss Bates, or when Mrs. and Miss Bates returned the visit. Nowwas the time for Mr. Frank Churchill to come among them; and the hopestrengthened when it was understood that he had written to his newmother on the occasion. For a few days, every morning visit in Highburyincluded some mention of the handsome letter Mrs. Weston had received]
 [I suppose you have heard of the handsome letter Mr. Frank Churchillhas written to Mrs. Weston? I understand it was a very handsome letter,indeed. Mr. Woodhouse told me of it. Mr. Woodhouse saw the letter, andhe says he never saw such a handsome letter in his life]
 [It was, indeed, a highly prized letter. Mrs. Weston had, of course,formed a very favourable idea of the young man; and such a pleasingattention was an irresistible proof of his great good sense, and a mostwelcome addition to every source and every expression of congratulationwhich her marriage had already secured. She felt herself a mostfortunate woman; and she had lived long enough to know how fortunateshe might well be thought, where the only regret was for a partialseparation from friends whose friendship for her had never cooled, andwho could ill bear to part with her.She knew that at times she must be missed; and could not think, withoutpain, of Emma's losing a single pleasure, or suffering an hour's ennui,from the want of her companionableness: but dear Emma was of no feeblecharacter; she was more equal to her situation than most girls wouldhave been, and had sense, and energy, and spirits that might be hopedwould bear her well and happily through its little difficulties andprivations. And then there was such comfort in the very easy distance ofRandalls from Hartfield, so convenient for even solitary female walking,and in Mr. Weston's disposition and circumstances, which would make theapproaching season no hindrance to their spending half the evenings inthe week together.Her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude to Mrs.Weston, and of moments only of regret; and her satisfaction--her morethan satisfaction--her cheerful enjoyment, was so just and so apparent,that Emma, well as she knew her father, was sometimes taken by surprizeat his being still able to pity 'poor Miss Taylor,' when they left herat Randalls in the centre of every domestic comfort, or saw her go awayin the evening attended by her pleasant husband to a carriage of herown. But never did she go without Mr. Woodhouse's giving a gentle sigh,and saying, "Ah, poor Miss Taylor! She would be very glad to stay]
 [There was no recovering Miss Taylor--nor much likelihood of ceasing topity her; but a few weeks brought some alleviation to Mr. Woodhouse.The compliments of his neighbours were over; he was no longer teased bybeing wished joy of so sorrowful an event; and the wedding-cake, whichhad been a great distress to him, was all eat up. His own stomachcould bear nothing rich, and he could never believe other people to bedifferent from himself. What was unwholesome to him he regarded as unfitfor any body; and he had, therefore, earnestly tried to dissuade themfrom having any wedding-cake at all, and when that proved vain, asearnestly tried to prevent any body's eating it. He had been at thepains of consulting Mr. Perry, the apothecary, on the subject. Mr. Perrywas an intelligent, gentlemanlike man, whose frequent visits were oneof the comforts of Mr. Woodhouse's life; and upon being applied to, hecould not but acknowledge (though it seemed rather against the biasof inclination) that wedding-cake might certainly disagree withmany--perhaps with most people, unless taken moderately. With such anopinion, in confirmation of his own, Mr. Woodhouse hoped to influenceevery visitor of the newly married pair; but still the cake was eaten;and there was no rest for his benevolent nerves till it was all gone.There was a strange rumour in Highbury of all the little Perrys beingseen with a slice of Mrs. Weston's wedding-cake in their hands: but Mr.Woodhouse would never believe it.CHAPTER IIIMr. Woodhouse was fond of society in his own way. He liked very much tohave his friends come and see him; and from various united causes, fromhis long residence at Hartfield, and his good nature, from his fortune,his house, and his daughter, he could command the visits of hisown little circle, in a great measure, as he liked. He had not muchintercourse with any families beyond that circle; his horror of latehours, and large dinner-parties, made him unfit for any acquaintance butsuch as would visit him on his own terms. Fortunately for him, Highbury,including Randalls in the same parish, and Donwell Abbey in the parishadjoining, the seat of Mr. Knightley, comprehended many such. Notunfrequently, through Emma's persuasion, he had some of the chosen andthe best to dine with him: but evening parties were what he preferred;and, unless he fancied himself at any time unequal to company, therewas scarcely an evening in the week in which Emma could not make up acard-table for him.Real, long-standing regard brought the Westons and Mr. Knightley; and byMr. Elton, a young man living alone without liking it, the privilegeof exchanging any vacant evening of his own blank solitude for theelegancies and society of Mr. Woodhouse's drawing-room, and the smilesof his lovely daughter, was in no danger of being thrown away.After these came a second set; among the most come-at-able of whom wereMrs. and Miss Bates, and Mrs. Goddard, three ladies almost always atthe service of an invitation from Hartfield, and who were fetched andcarried home so often, that Mr. Woodhouse thought it no hardship foreither James or the horses. Had it taken place only once a year, itwould have been a grievance.Mrs. Bates, the widow of a former vicar of Highbury, was a very oldlady, almost past every thing but tea and quadrille. She lived with hersingle daughter in a very small way, and was considered with all theregard and respect which a harmless old lady, under such untowardcircumstances, can excite. Her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degreeof popularity for a woman neither young, handsome, rich, nor married.Miss Bates stood in the very worst predicament in the world for havingmuch of the public favour; and she had no intellectual superiority tomake atonement to herself, or frighten those who might hate her intooutward respect. She had never boasted either beauty or cleverness. Heryouth had passed without distinction, and her middle of life was devotedto the care of a failing mother, and the endeavour to make a smallincome go as far as possible. And yet she was a happy woman, and a womanwhom no one named without good-will. It was her own universal good-willand contented temper which worked such wonders. She loved every body,was interested in every body's happiness, quicksighted to every body'smerits; thought herself a most fortunate creature, and surrounded withblessings in such an excellent mother, and so many good neighboursand friends, and a home that wanted for nothing. The simplicity andcheerfulness of her nature, her contented and grateful spirit, were arecommendation to every body, and a mine of felicity to herself. She wasa great talker upon little matters, which exactly suited Mr. Woodhouse,full of trivial communications and harmless gossip.Mrs. Goddard was the mistress of a School--not of a seminary, or anestablishment, or any thing which professed, in long sentences ofrefined nonsense, to combine liberal acquirements with elegant morality,upon new principles and new systems--and where young ladies for enormouspay might be screwed out of health and into vanity--but a real,honest, old-fashioned Boarding-school, where a reasonable quantity ofaccomplishments were sold at a reasonable price, and where girls mightbe sent to be out of the way, and scramble themselves into a littleeducation, without any danger of coming back prodigies. Mrs. Goddard'sschool was in high repute--and very deservedly; for Highbury wasreckoned a particularly healthy spot: she had an ample house and garden,gave the children plenty of wholesome food, let them run about a greatdeal in the summer, and in winter dressed their chilblains with her ownhands. It was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now walkedafter her to church. She was a plain, motherly kind of woman, whohad worked hard in her youth, and now thought herself entitled to theoccasional holiday of a tea-visit; and having formerly owed much to Mr.Woodhouse's kindness, felt his particular claim on her to leave her neatparlour, hung round with fancy-work, whenever she could, and win or losea few sixpences by his fireside.These were the ladies whom Emma found herself very frequently able tocollect; and happy was she, for her father's sake, in the power; though,as far as she was herself concerned, it was no remedy for the absence ofMrs. Weston. She was delighted to see her father look comfortable, andvery much pleased with herself for contriving things so well; but thequiet prosings of three such women made her feel that every evening sospent was indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated.As she sat one morning, looking forward to exactly such a close of thepresent day, a note was brought from Mrs. Goddard, requesting, in mostrespectful terms, to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her; a mostwelcome request: for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen, whom Emma knewvery well by sight, and had long felt an interest in, on account ofher beauty. A very gracious invitation was returned, and the evening nolonger dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion.Harriet Smith was the natural daughter of somebody. Somebody had placedher, several years back, at Mrs. Goddard's school, and somebodyhad lately raised her from the condition of scholar to that ofparlour-boarder. This was all that was generally known of her history.She had no visible friends but what had been acquired at Highbury, andwas now just returned from a long visit in the country to some youngladies who had been at school there with her.She was a very pretty girl, and her beauty happened to be of a sortwhich Emma particularly admired. She was short, plump, and fair, with afine bloom, blue eyes, light hair, regular features, and a look of greatsweetness, and, before the end of the evening, Emma was as much pleasedwith her manners as her person, and quite determined to continue theacquaintance.She was not struck by any thing remarkably clever in Miss Smith'sconversation, but she found her altogether very engaging--notinconveniently shy, not unwilling to talk--and yet so far from pushing,shewing so proper and becoming a deference, seeming so pleasantlygrateful for being admitted to Hartfield, and so artlessly impressedby the appearance of every thing in so superior a style to what she hadbeen used to, that she must have good sense, and deserve encouragement.Encouragement should be given. Those soft blue eyes, and all thosenatural graces, should not be wasted on the inferior society of Highburyand its connexions. The acquaintance she had already formed wereunworthy of her. The friends from whom she had just parted, though verygood sort of people, must be doing her harm. They were a family of thename of Martin, whom Emma well knew by character, as renting a largefarm of Mr. Knightley, and residing in the parish of Donwell--verycreditably, she believed--she knew Mr. Knightley thought highly ofthem--but they must be coarse and unpolished, and very unfit to be theintimates of a girl who wanted only a little more knowledge and eleganceto be quite perfect. _She_ would notice her; she would improve her; shewould detach her from her bad acquaintance, and introduce her into goodsociety; she would form her opinions and her manners. It would be aninteresting, and certainly a very kind undertaking; highly becoming herown situation in life, her leisure, and powers.She was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes, in talking andlistening, and forming all these schemes in the in-betweens, that theevening flew away at a very unusual rate; and the supper-table, whichalways closed such parties, and for which she had been used to sit andwatch the due time, was all set out and ready, and moved forwards to thefire, before she was aware. With an alacrity beyond the common impulseof a spirit which yet was never indifferent to the credit of doing everything well and attentively, with the real good-will of a mind delightedwith its own ideas, did she then do all the honours of the meal, andhelp and recommend the minced chicken and scalloped oysters, with anurgency which she knew would be acceptable to the early hours and civilscruples of their guests.Upon such occasions poor Mr. Woodhouse's feelings were in sad warfare.He loved to have the cloth laid, because it had been the fashion of hisyouth, but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made himrather sorry to see any thing put on it; and while his hospitality wouldhave welcomed his visitors to every thing, his care for their healthmade him grieve that they would eat.Such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was all that he could,with thorough self-approbation, recommend; though he might constrainhimself, while the ladies were comfortably clearing the nicer things, tosay:"Mrs. Bates, let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs. An eggboiled very soft is not unwholesome. Serle understands boiling an eggbetter than any body. I would not recommend an egg boiled by any bodyelse; but you need not be afraid, they are very small, you see--one ofour small eggs will not hurt you. Miss Bates, let Emma help you to a_little_ bit of tart--a _very_ little bit. Ours are all apple-tarts. Youneed not be afraid of unwholesome preserves here. I do not advise thecustard. Mrs. Goddard, what say you to _half_ a glass of wine? A_small_ half-glass, put into a tumbler of water? I do not think it coulddisagree with you]
 [Emma allowed her father to talk--but supplied her visitors in a muchmore satisfactory style, and on the present evening had particularpleasure in sending them away happy. The happiness of Miss Smith wasquite equal to her intentions. Miss Woodhouse was so great a personagein Highbury, that the prospect of the introduction had given as muchpanic as pleasure; but the humble, grateful little girl went off withhighly gratified feelings, delighted with the affability with which MissWoodhouse had treated her all the evening, and actually shaken handswith her at last!CHAPTER IVHarriet Smith's intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing. Quickand decided in her ways, Emma lost no time in inviting, encouraging, andtelling her to come very often; and as their acquaintance increased, sodid their satisfaction in each other. As a walking companion, Emma hadvery early foreseen how useful she might find her. In that respectMrs. Weston's loss had been important. Her father never went beyond theshrubbery, where two divisions of the ground sufficed him for his longwalk, or his short, as the year varied; and since Mrs. Weston's marriageher exercise had been too much confined. She had ventured once alone toRandalls, but it was not pleasant; and a Harriet Smith, therefore,one whom she could summon at any time to a walk, would be a valuableaddition to her privileges. But in every respect, as she saw more ofher, she approved her, and was confirmed in all her kind designs.Harriet certainly was not clever, but she had a sweet, docile, gratefuldisposition, was totally free from conceit, and only desiring to beguided by any one she looked up to. Her early attachment to herselfwas very amiable; and her inclination for good company, and power ofappreciating what was elegant and clever, shewed that there was nowant of taste, though strength of understanding must not be expected.Altogether she was quite convinced of Harriet Smith's being exactly theyoung friend she wanted--exactly the something which her home required.Such a friend as Mrs. Weston was out of the question. Two such couldnever be granted. Two such she did not want. It was quite a differentsort of thing, a sentiment distinct and independent. Mrs. Weston was theobject of a regard which had its basis in gratitude and esteem. Harrietwould be loved as one to whom she could be useful. For Mrs. Weston therewas nothing to be done; for Harriet every thing.Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out whowere the parents, but Harriet could not tell. She was ready to tellevery thing in her power, but on this subject questions were vain. Emmawas obliged to fancy what she liked--but she could never believe that inthe same situation _she_ should not have discovered the truth. Harriethad no penetration. She had been satisfied to hear and believe just whatMrs. Goddard chose to tell her; and looked no farther.Mrs. Goddard, and the teachers, and the girls and the affairs ofthe school in general, formed naturally a great part of theconversation--and but for her acquaintance with the Martins ofAbbey-Mill Farm, it must have been the whole. But the Martins occupiedher thoughts a good deal; she had spent two very happy months with them,and now loved to talk of the pleasures of her visit, and describethe many comforts and wonders of the place. Emma encouraged hertalkativeness--amused by such a picture of another set of beings,and enjoying the youthful simplicity which could speak with so muchexultation of Mrs. Martin's having "_two_ parlours, two very goodparlours, indeed; one of them quite as large as Mrs. Goddard'sdrawing-room; and of her having an upper maid who had livedfive-and-twenty years with her; and of their having eight cows, two ofthem Alderneys, and one a little Welch cow, a very pretty little Welchcow indeed; and of Mrs. Martin's saying as she was so fond of it,it should be called _her_ cow; and of their having a very handsomesummer-house in their garden, where some day next year they were all todrink tea:--a very handsome summer-house, large enough to hold a dozenpeople]
 [For some time she was amused, without thinking beyond the immediatecause; but as she came to understand the family better, other feelingsarose. She had taken up a wrong idea, fancying it was a mother anddaughter, a son and son's wife, who all lived together; but when itappeared that the Mr. Martin, who bore a part in the narrative, and wasalways mentioned with approbation for his great good-nature in doingsomething or other, was a single man; that there was no young Mrs.Martin, no wife in the case; she did suspect danger to her poor littlefriend from all this hospitality and kindness, and that, if she were nottaken care of, she might be required to sink herself forever.With this inspiriting notion, her questions increased in number andmeaning; and she particularly led Harriet to talk more of Mr. Martin,and there was evidently no dislike to it. Harriet was very ready tospeak of the share he had had in their moonlight walks and merry eveninggames; and dwelt a good deal upon his being so very good-humoured andobliging. He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring hersome walnuts, because she had said how fond she was of them, and inevery thing else he was so very obliging. He had his shepherd's son intothe parlour one night on purpose to sing to her. She was very fondof singing. He could sing a little himself. She believed he was veryclever, and understood every thing. He had a very fine flock, and, whileshe was with them, he had been bid more for his wool than any body inthe country. She believed every body spoke well of him. His mother andsisters were very fond of him. Mrs. Martin had told her one day (andthere was a blush as she said it,) that it was impossible for any bodyto be a better son, and therefore she was sure, whenever he married, hewould make a good husband. Not that she _wanted_ him to marry. She wasin no hurry at all]
 [Well done, Mrs. Martin!" thought Emma. "You know what you are about]
 ["And when she had come away, Mrs. Martin was so very kind as to sendMrs. Goddard a beautiful goose--the finest goose Mrs. Goddard had everseen. Mrs. Goddard had dressed it on a Sunday, and asked all the threeteachers, Miss Nash, and Miss Prince, and Miss Richardson, to sup withher]
 ["Mr. Martin, I suppose, is not a man of information beyond the line ofhis own business? He does not read?""Oh yes!--that is, no--I do not know--but I believe he has read agood deal--but not what you would think any thing of. He reads theAgricultural Reports, and some other books that lay in one of the windowseats--but he reads all _them_ to himself. But sometimes of an evening,before we went to cards, he would read something aloud out of theElegant Extracts, very entertaining. And I know he has read the Vicar ofWakefield. He never read the Romance of the Forest, nor The Children ofthe Abbey. He had never heard of such books before I mentioned them, buthe is determined to get them now as soon as ever he can]
 [The next question was--"What sort of looking man is Mr. Martin?""Oh! not handsome--not at all handsome. I thought him very plain atfirst, but I do not think him so plain now. One does not, you know,after a time. But did you never see him? He is in Highbury every now andthen, and he is sure to ride through every week in his way to Kingston.He has passed you very often]
 ["That may be, and I may have seen him fifty times, but without havingany idea of his name. A young farmer, whether on horseback or on foot,is the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity. The yeomanry areprecisely the order of people with whom I feel I can have nothing to do.A degree or two lower, and a creditable appearance might interest me;I might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other. Buta farmer can need none of my help, and is, therefore, in one sense, asmuch above my notice as in every other he is below it]
 ["To be sure. Oh yes! It is not likely you should ever have observed him;but he knows you very well indeed--I mean by sight]
 ["I have no doubt of his being a very respectable young man. I know,indeed, that he is so, and, as such, wish him well. What do you imaginehis age to be?""He was four-and-twenty the 8th of last June, and my birthday is the23rd just a fortnight and a day's difference--which is very odd]
 ["Only four-and-twenty. That is too young to settle. His mother isperfectly right not to be in a hurry. They seem very comfortable as theyare, and if she were to take any pains to marry him, she would probablyrepent it. Six years hence, if he could meet with a good sort of youngwoman in the same rank as his own, with a little money, it might be verydesirable]
 ["Six years hence! Dear Miss Woodhouse, he would be thirty years old!""Well, and that is as early as most men can afford to marry, who are notborn to an independence. Mr. Martin, I imagine, has his fortune entirelyto make--cannot be at all beforehand with the world. Whatever money hemight come into when his father died, whatever his share of the familyproperty, it is, I dare say, all afloat, all employed in his stock, andso forth; and though, with diligence and good luck, he may be rich intime, it is next to impossible that he should have realised any thingyet]
 ["To be sure, so it is. But they live very comfortably. They have noindoors man, else they do not want for any thing; and Mrs. Martin talksof taking a boy another year]
 ["I wish you may not get into a scrape, Harriet, whenever he doesmarry;--I mean, as to being acquainted with his wife--for though hissisters, from a superior education, are not to be altogether objectedto, it does not follow that he might marry any body at all fit for youto notice. The misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularlycareful as to your associates. There can be no doubt of your being agentleman's daughter, and you must support your claim to that station byevery thing within your own power, or there will be plenty of people whowould take pleasure in degrading you]
 ["Yes, to be sure, I suppose there are. But while I visit at Hartfield,and you are so kind to me, Miss Woodhouse, I am not afraid of what anybody can do]
 ["You understand the force of influence pretty well, Harriet; but I wouldhave you so firmly established in good society, as to be independenteven of Hartfield and Miss Woodhouse. I want to see you permanentlywell connected, and to that end it will be advisable to have as few oddacquaintance as may be; and, therefore, I say that if you should stillbe in this country when Mr. Martin marries, I wish you may not be drawnin by your intimacy with the sisters, to be acquainted with the wife,who will probably be some mere farmer's daughter, without education]
 ["To be sure. Yes. Not that I think Mr. Martin would ever marry any bodybut what had had some education--and been very well brought up. However,I do not mean to set up my opinion against yours--and I am sure I shallnot wish for the acquaintance of his wife. I shall always have a greatregard for the Miss Martins, especially Elizabeth, and should be verysorry to give them up, for they are quite as well educated as me. Butif he marries a very ignorant, vulgar woman, certainly I had better notvisit her, if I can help it]
 [Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speech, and saw noalarming symptoms of love. The young man had been the first admirer, butshe trusted there was no other hold, and that there would be no seriousdifficulty, on Harriet's side, to oppose any friendly arrangement of herown.They met Mr. Martin the very next day, as they were walking on theDonwell road. He was on foot, and after looking very respectfully ather, looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion. Emma wasnot sorry to have such an opportunity of survey; and walking a fewyards forward, while they talked together, soon made her quick eyesufficiently acquainted with Mr. Robert Martin. His appearance was veryneat, and he looked like a sensible young man, but his person had noother advantage; and when he came to be contrasted with gentlemen,she thought he must lose all the ground he had gained in Harriet'sinclination. Harriet was not insensible of manner; she had voluntarilynoticed her father's gentleness with admiration as well as wonder. Mr.Martin looked as if he did not know what manner was.They remained but a few minutes together, as Miss Woodhouse must not bekept waiting; and Harriet then came running to her with a smiling face,and in a flutter of spirits, which Miss Woodhouse hoped very soon tocompose]
 [Only think of our happening to meet him!--How very odd! It was quitea chance, he said, that he had not gone round by Randalls. He did notthink we ever walked this road. He thought we walked towards Randallsmost days. He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet.He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot it,but he goes again to-morrow. So very odd we should happen to meet! Well,Miss Woodhouse, is he like what you expected? What do you think of him?Do you think him so very plain?""He is very plain, undoubtedly--remarkably plain:--but that is nothingcompared with his entire want of gentility. I had no right to expectmuch, and I did not expect much; but I had no idea that he could be sovery clownish, so totally without air. I had imagined him, I confess, adegree or two nearer gentility]
 ["To be sure," said Harriet, in a mortified voice, "he is not so genteelas real gentlemen]
 ["I think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with us, you have beenrepeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlemen, that youmust yourself be struck with the difference in Mr. Martin. At Hartfield,you have had very good specimens of well educated, well bred men. Ishould be surprized if, after seeing them, you could be in companywith Mr. Martin again without perceiving him to be a very inferiorcreature--and rather wondering at yourself for having ever thought himat all agreeable before. Do not you begin to feel that now? Were notyou struck? I am sure you must have been struck by his awkward look andabrupt manner, and the uncouthness of a voice which I heard to be whollyunmodulated as I stood here]
 ["Certainly, he is not like Mr. Knightley. He has not such a fine air andway of walking as Mr. Knightley. I see the difference plain enough. ButMr. Knightley is so very fine a man!""Mr. Knightley's air is so remarkably good that it is not fair tocompare Mr. Martin with _him_. You might not see one in a hundred with_gentleman_ so plainly written as in Mr. Knightley. But he is not theonly gentleman you have been lately used to. What say you to Mr. Westonand Mr. Elton? Compare Mr. Martin with either of _them_. Compare theirmanner of carrying themselves; of walking; of speaking; of being silent.You must see the difference]
 ["Oh yes!--there is a great difference. But Mr. Weston is almost an oldman. Mr. Weston must be between forty and fifty]
 ["Which makes his good manners the more valuable. The older a persongrows, Harriet, the more important it is that their manners should notbe bad; the more glaring and disgusting any loudness, or coarseness, orawkwardness becomes. What is passable in youth is detestable in laterage. Mr. Martin is now awkward and abrupt; what will he be at Mr.Weston's time of life?""There is no saying, indeed," replied Harriet rather solemnly]
 [But there may be pretty good guessing. He will be a completely gross,vulgar farmer, totally inattentive to appearances, and thinking ofnothing but profit and loss]
 ["Will he, indeed? That will be very bad]
 ["How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from thecircumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended.He was a great deal too full of the market to think of any thingelse--which is just as it should be, for a thriving man. What has he todo with books? And I have no doubt that he _will_ thrive, and be a veryrich man in time--and his being illiterate and coarse need not disturb_us_]
 ["I wonder he did not remember the book"--was all Harriet's answer, andspoken with a degree of grave displeasure which Emma thought might besafely left to itself. She, therefore, said no more for some time. Hernext beginning was,"In one respect, perhaps, Mr. Elton's manners are superior to Mr.Knightley's or Mr. Weston's. They have more gentleness. They might bemore safely held up as a pattern. There is an openness, a quickness,almost a bluntness in Mr. Weston, which every body likes in _him_,because there is so much good-humour with it--but that would not do tobe copied. Neither would Mr. Knightley's downright, decided, commandingsort of manner, though it suits _him_ very well; his figure, and look,and situation in life seem to allow it; but if any young man were to setabout copying him, he would not be sufferable. On the contrary, I thinka young man might be very safely recommended to take Mr. Elton as amodel. Mr. Elton is good-humoured, cheerful, obliging, and gentle.He seems to me to be grown particularly gentle of late. I do not knowwhether he has any design of ingratiating himself with either of us,Harriet, by additional softness, but it strikes me that his manners aresofter than they used to be. If he means any thing, it must be to pleaseyou. Did not I tell you what he said of you the other day?"She then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawn from Mr.Elton, and now did full justice to; and Harriet blushed and smiled, andsaid she had always thought Mr. Elton very agreeable.Mr. Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving the youngfarmer out of Harriet's head. She thought it would be an excellentmatch; and only too palpably desirable, natural, and probable, for herto have much merit in planning it. She feared it was what every bodyelse must think of and predict. It was not likely, however, that anybody should have equalled her in the date of the plan, as it hadentered her brain during the very first evening of Harriet's coming toHartfield. The longer she considered it, the greater was her senseof its expediency. Mr. Elton's situation was most suitable, quite thegentleman himself, and without low connexions; at the same time, not ofany family that could fairly object to the doubtful birth of Harriet.He had a comfortable home for her, and Emma imagined a very sufficientincome; for though the vicarage of Highbury was not large, he was knownto have some independent property; and she thought very highly of himas a good-humoured, well-meaning, respectable young man, without anydeficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world.She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautifulgirl, which she trusted, with such frequent meetings at Hartfield, wasfoundation enough on his side; and on Harriet's there could be littledoubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have all the usualweight and efficacy. And he was really a very pleasing young man, ayoung man whom any woman not fastidious might like. He was reckoned veryhandsome; his person much admired in general, though not by her,there being a want of elegance of feature which she could not dispensewith:--but the girl who could be gratified by a Robert Martin's ridingabout the country to get walnuts for her might very well be conquered byMr. Elton's admiration.CHAPTER V"I do not know what your opinion may be, Mrs. Weston," said Mr.Knightley, "of this great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith, but Ithink it a bad thing]
 ["A bad thing! Do you really think it a bad thing?--why so?""I think they will neither of them do the other any good]
 ["You surprize me! Emma must do Harriet good: and by supplying her with anew object of interest, Harriet may be said to do Emma good. I have beenseeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure. How very differentlywe feel!--Not think they will do each other any good! This willcertainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma, Mr.Knightley]
 ["Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel with you, knowingWeston to be out, and that you must still fight your own battle]
 ["Mr. Weston would undoubtedly support me, if he were here, for he thinksexactly as I do on the subject. We were speaking of it only yesterday,and agreeing how fortunate it was for Emma, that there should be such agirl in Highbury for her to associate with. Mr. Knightley, I shall notallow you to be a fair judge in this case. You are so much used to livealone, that you do not know the value of a companion; and, perhaps noman can be a good judge of the comfort a woman feels in the society ofone of her own sex, after being used to it all her life. I can imagineyour objection to Harriet Smith. She is not the superior young womanwhich Emma's friend ought to be. But on the other hand, as Emma wantsto see her better informed, it will be an inducement to her to read moreherself. They will read together. She means it, I know]
 ["Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve years old.I have seen a great many lists of her drawing-up at various times ofbooks that she meant to read regularly through--and very good liststhey were--very well chosen, and very neatly arranged--sometimesalphabetically, and sometimes by some other rule. The list she drewup when only fourteen--I remember thinking it did her judgment so muchcredit, that I preserved it some time; and I dare say she may have madeout a very good list now. But I have done with expecting any course ofsteady reading from Emma. She will never submit to any thingrequiring industry and patience, and a subjection of the fancy to theunderstanding. Where Miss Taylor failed to stimulate, I may safelyaffirm that Harriet Smith will do nothing.--You never could persuade herto read half so much as you wished.--You know you could not]
 ["I dare say," replied Mrs. Weston, smiling, "that I thought so_then_;--but since we have parted, I can never remember Emma's omittingto do any thing I wished]
 ["There is hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as _that_,"--saidMr. Knightley, feelingly; and for a moment or two he had done. "But I,"he soon added, "who have had no such charm thrown over my senses, muststill see, hear, and remember. Emma is spoiled by being the cleverestof her family. At ten years old, she had the misfortune of being able toanswer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen. She was alwaysquick and assured: Isabella slow and diffident. And ever since shewas twelve, Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all. In hermother she lost the only person able to cope with her. She inherits hermother's talents, and must have been under subjection to her]
 ["I should have been sorry, Mr. Knightley, to be dependent on _your_recommendation, had I quitted Mr. Woodhouse's family and wanted anothersituation; I do not think you would have spoken a good word for me toany body. I am sure you always thought me unfit for the office I held]
 ["Yes," said he, smiling. "You are better placed _here_; very fit for awife, but not at all for a governess. But you were preparing yourself tobe an excellent wife all the time you were at Hartfield. You mightnot give Emma such a complete education as your powers would seem topromise; but you were receiving a very good education from _her_, on thevery material matrimonial point of submitting your own will, and doingas you were bid; and if Weston had asked me to recommend him a wife, Ishould certainly have named Miss Taylor]
 ["Thank you. There will be very little merit in making a good wife tosuch a man as Mr. Weston]
 ["Why, to own the truth, I am afraid you are rather thrown away, and thatwith every disposition to bear, there will be nothing to be borne. Wewill not despair, however. Weston may grow cross from the wantonness ofcomfort, or his son may plague him]
 ["I hope not _that_.--It is not likely. No, Mr. Knightley, do notforetell vexation from that quarter]
 ["Not I, indeed. I only name possibilities. I do not pretend to Emma'sgenius for foretelling and guessing. I hope, with all my heart, theyoung man may be a Weston in merit, and a Churchill in fortune.--ButHarriet Smith--I have not half done about Harriet Smith. I think her thevery worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have. She knowsnothing herself, and looks upon Emma as knowing every thing. She is aflatterer in all her ways; and so much the worse, because undesigned.Her ignorance is hourly flattery. How can Emma imagine she has anything to learn herself, while Harriet is presenting such a delightfulinferiority? And as for Harriet, I will venture to say that _she_ cannotgain by the acquaintance. Hartfield will only put her out of conceitwith all the other places she belongs to. She will grow just refinedenough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and circumstanceshave placed her home. I am much mistaken if Emma's doctrines give anystrength of mind, or tend at all to make a girl adapt herself rationallyto the varieties of her situation in life.--They only give a littlepolish]
 ["I either depend more upon Emma's good sense than you do, or am moreanxious for her present comfort; for I cannot lament the acquaintance.How well she looked last night!""Oh! you would rather talk of her person than her mind, would you? Verywell; I shall not attempt to deny Emma's being pretty]
 ["Pretty! say beautiful rather. Can you imagine any thing nearer perfectbeauty than Emma altogether--face and figure?""I do not know what I could imagine, but I confess that I have seldomseen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers. But I am a partialold friend]
 ["Such an eye!--the true hazle eye--and so brilliant! regular features,open countenance, with a complexion! oh! what a bloom of full health,and such a pretty height and size; such a firm and upright figure!There is health, not merely in her bloom, but in her air, her head, herglance. One hears sometimes of a child being 'the picture of health;'now, Emma always gives me the idea of being the complete picture ofgrown-up health. She is loveliness itself. Mr. Knightley, is not she?""I have not a fault to find with her person," he replied. "I think herall you describe. I love to look at her; and I will add this praise,that I do not think her personally vain. Considering how very handsomeshe is, she appears to be little occupied with it; her vanity liesanother way. Mrs. Weston, I am not to be talked out of my dislike ofHarriet Smith, or my dread of its doing them both harm]
 ["And I, Mr. Knightley, am equally stout in my confidence of its notdoing them any harm. With all dear Emma's little faults, she is anexcellent creature. Where shall we see a better daughter, or a kindersister, or a truer friend? No, no; she has qualities which may betrusted; she will never lead any one really wrong; she will make nolasting blunder; where Emma errs once, she is in the right a hundredtimes]
 ["Very well; I will not plague you any more. Emma shall be an angel, andI will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and Isabella.John loves Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection,and Isabella always thinks as he does; except when he is not quitefrightened enough about the children. I am sure of having their opinionswith me]
 ["I know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkind;but excuse me, Mr. Knightley, if I take the liberty (I consider myself,you know, as having somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma'smother might have had) the liberty of hinting that I do not think anypossible good can arise from Harriet Smith's intimacy being made amatter of much discussion among you. Pray excuse me; but supposing anylittle inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy, it cannot beexpected that Emma, accountable to nobody but her father, who perfectlyapproves the acquaintance, should put an end to it, so long as it is asource of pleasure to herself. It has been so many years my province togive advice, that you cannot be surprized, Mr. Knightley, at this littleremains of office]
 ["Not at all," cried he; "I am much obliged to you for it. It is verygood advice, and it shall have a better fate than your advice has oftenfound; for it shall be attended to]
 ["Mrs. John Knightley is easily alarmed, and might be made unhappy abouther sister]
 ["Be satisfied," said he, "I will not raise any outcry. I will keep myill-humour to myself. I have a very sincere interest in Emma. Isabelladoes not seem more my sister; has never excited a greater interest;perhaps hardly so great. There is an anxiety, a curiosity in what onefeels for Emma. I wonder what will become of her!""So do I," said Mrs. Weston gently, "very much]
 ["She always declares she will never marry, which, of course, means justnothing at all. But I have no idea that she has yet ever seen a man shecared for. It would not be a bad thing for her to be very much in lovewith a proper object. I should like to see Emma in love, and in somedoubt of a return; it would do her good. But there is nobody hereaboutsto attach her; and she goes so seldom from home]
 ["There does, indeed, seem as little to tempt her to break her resolutionat present," said Mrs. Weston, "as can well be; and while she is sohappy at Hartfield, I cannot wish her to be forming any attachment whichwould be creating such difficulties on poor Mr. Woodhouse's account. Ido not recommend matrimony at present to Emma, though I mean no slightto the state, I assure you]
 [Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her ownand Mr. Weston's on the subject, as much as possible. There were wishesat Randalls respecting Emma's destiny, but it was not desirable tohave them suspected; and the quiet transition which Mr. Knightley soonafterwards made to "What does Weston think of the weather; shall we haverain?" convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise aboutHartfield.CHAPTER VIEmma could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet's fancy a properdirection and raised the gratitude of her young vanity to a very goodpurpose, for she found her decidedly more sensible than before of Mr.Elton's being a remarkably handsome man, with most agreeable manners;and as she had no hesitation in following up the assurance of hisadmiration by agreeable hints, she was soon pretty confident of creatingas much liking on Harriet's side, as there could be any occasion for.She was quite convinced of Mr. Elton's being in the fairest way offalling in love, if not in love already. She had no scruple with regardto him. He talked of Harriet, and praised her so warmly, that she couldnot suppose any thing wanting which a little time would not add. Hisperception of the striking improvement of Harriet's manner, since herintroduction at Hartfield, was not one of the least agreeable proofs ofhis growing attachment]
 [You have given Miss Smith all that she required," said he; "you havemade her graceful and easy. She was a beautiful creature when shecame to you, but, in my opinion, the attractions you have added areinfinitely superior to what she received from nature]
 ["I am glad you think I have been useful to her; but Harriet only wanteddrawing out, and receiving a few, very few hints. She had all thenatural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself. I havedone very little]
 ["If it were admissible to contradict a lady," said the gallant Mr.Elton--"I have perhaps given her a little more decision of character, havetaught her to think on points which had not fallen in her way before]
 ["Exactly so; that is what principally strikes me. So much superaddeddecision of character! Skilful has been the hand!""Great has been the pleasure, I am sure. I never met with a dispositionmore truly amiable]
 ["I have no doubt of it]
 [ And it was spoken with a sort of sighinganimation, which had a vast deal of the lover. She was not less pleasedanother day with the manner in which he seconded a sudden wish of hers,to have Harriet's picture]
 [Did you ever have your likeness taken, Harriet?" said she: "did youever sit for your picture?"Harriet was on the point of leaving the room, and only stopt to say,with a very interesting naivete,"Oh! dear, no, never]
 [No sooner was she out of sight, than Emma exclaimed,"What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be! I wouldgive any money for it. I almost long to attempt her likeness myself.You do not know it I dare say, but two or three years ago I had a greatpassion for taking likenesses, and attempted several of my friends, andwas thought to have a tolerable eye in general. But from one cause oranother, I gave it up in disgust. But really, I could almost venture,if Harriet would sit to me. It would be such a delight to have herpicture!""Let me entreat you," cried Mr. Elton; "it would indeed be a delight!Let me entreat you, Miss Woodhouse, to exercise so charming a talentin favour of your friend. I know what your drawings are. How couldyou suppose me ignorant? Is not this room rich in specimens of yourlandscapes and flowers; and has not Mrs. Weston some inimitablefigure-pieces in her drawing-room, at Randalls?"Yes, good man!--thought Emma--but what has all that to do with takinglikenesses? You know nothing of drawing. Don't pretend to be in rapturesabout mine. Keep your raptures for Harriet's face. "Well, if you give mesuch kind encouragement, Mr. Elton, I believe I shall try what I can do.Harriet's features are very delicate, which makes a likeness difficult;and yet there is a peculiarity in the shape of the eye and the linesabout the mouth which one ought to catch]
 ["Exactly so--The shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth--I havenot a doubt of your success. Pray, pray attempt it. As you will do it,it will indeed, to use your own words, be an exquisite possession]
 ["But I am afraid, Mr. Elton, Harriet will not like to sit. She thinksso little of her own beauty. Did not you observe her manner of answeringme? How completely it meant, 'why should my picture be drawn?'""Oh! yes, I observed it, I assure you. It was not lost on me. But stillI cannot imagine she would not be persuaded]
 [Harriet was soon back again, and the proposal almost immediately made;and she had no scruples which could stand many minutes against theearnest pressing of both the others. Emma wished to go to work directly,and therefore produced the portfolio containing her various attempts atportraits, for not one of them had ever been finished, that they mightdecide together on the best size for Harriet. Her many beginnings weredisplayed. Miniatures, half-lengths, whole-lengths, pencil, crayon, andwater-colours had been all tried in turn. She had always wanted to doevery thing, and had made more progress both in drawing and music thanmany might have done with so little labour as she would ever submit to.She played and sang;--and drew in almost every style; but steadinesshad always been wanting; and in nothing had she approached the degree ofexcellence which she would have been glad to command, and ought not tohave failed of. She was not much deceived as to her own skill eitheras an artist or a musician, but she was not unwilling to have othersdeceived, or sorry to know her reputation for accomplishment oftenhigher than it deserved.There was merit in every drawing--in the least finished, perhaps themost; her style was spirited; but had there been much less, or had therebeen ten times more, the delight and admiration of her two companionswould have been the same. They were both in ecstasies. A likenesspleases every body; and Miss Woodhouse's performances must be capital]
 [No great variety of faces for you," said Emma. "I had only my ownfamily to study from. There is my father--another of my father--but theidea of sitting for his picture made him so nervous, that I could onlytake him by stealth; neither of them very like therefore. Mrs. Westonagain, and again, and again, you see. Dear Mrs. Weston! always mykindest friend on every occasion. She would sit whenever I asked her.There is my sister; and really quite her own little elegant figure!--andthe face not unlike. I should have made a good likeness of her, if shewould have sat longer, but she was in such a hurry to have me drawher four children that she would not be quiet. Then, here come all myattempts at three of those four children;--there they are, Henry andJohn and Bella, from one end of the sheet to the other, and any one ofthem might do for any one of the rest. She was so eager to have themdrawn that I could not refuse; but there is no making children of threeor four years old stand still you know; nor can it be very easy to takeany likeness of them, beyond the air and complexion, unless they arecoarser featured than any of mama's children ever were. Here is mysketch of the fourth, who was a baby. I took him as he was sleeping onthe sofa, and it is as strong a likeness of his cockade as you wouldwish to see. He had nestled down his head most conveniently. That's verylike. I am rather proud of little George. The corner of the sofa is verygood. Then here is my last,"--unclosing a pretty sketch of a gentlemanin small size, whole-length--"my last and my best--my brother, Mr. JohnKnightley.--This did not want much of being finished, when I put it awayin a pet, and vowed I would never take another likeness. I could nothelp being provoked; for after all my pains, and when I had really madea very good likeness of it--(Mrs. Weston and I were quite agreed inthinking it _very_ like)--only too handsome--too flattering--butthat was a fault on the right side"--after all this, came poor dearIsabella's cold approbation of--"Yes, it was a little like--but to besure it did not do him justice. We had had a great deal of troublein persuading him to sit at all. It was made a great favour of; andaltogether it was more than I could bear; and so I never would finishit, to have it apologised over as an unfavourable likeness, to everymorning visitor in Brunswick Square;--and, as I said, I did thenforswear ever drawing any body again. But for Harriet's sake, or ratherfor my own, and as there are no husbands and wives in the case _at__present_, I will break my resolution now]
 [Mr. Elton seemed very properly struck and delighted by the idea, and wasrepeating, "No husbands and wives in the case at present indeed, asyou observe. Exactly so. No husbands and wives," with so interesting aconsciousness, that Emma began to consider whether she had not betterleave them together at once. But as she wanted to be drawing, thedeclaration must wait a little longer.She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait. It was to bea whole-length in water-colours, like Mr. John Knightley's, and wasdestined, if she could please herself, to hold a very honourable stationover the mantelpiece.The sitting began; and Harriet, smiling and blushing, and afraid of notkeeping her attitude and countenance, presented a very sweet mixture ofyouthful expression to the steady eyes of the artist. But there was nodoing any thing, with Mr. Elton fidgeting behind her and watching everytouch. She gave him credit for stationing himself where he might gazeand gaze again without offence; but was really obliged to put an end toit, and request him to place himself elsewhere. It then occurred to herto employ him in reading]
 [If he would be so good as to read to them, it would be a kindnessindeed! It would amuse away the difficulties of her part, and lessen theirksomeness of Miss Smith's]
 [Mr. Elton was only too happy. Harriet listened, and Emma drew in peace.She must allow him to be still frequently coming to look; any thing lesswould certainly have been too little in a lover; and he was ready at thesmallest intermission of the pencil, to jump up and see the progress,and be charmed.--There was no being displeased with such an encourager,for his admiration made him discern a likeness almost before itwas possible. She could not respect his eye, but his love and hiscomplaisance were unexceptionable.The sitting was altogether very satisfactory; she was quite enoughpleased with the first day's sketch to wish to go on. There was no wantof likeness, she had been fortunate in the attitude, and as she meantto throw in a little improvement to the figure, to give a little moreheight, and considerably more elegance, she had great confidence ofits being in every way a pretty drawing at last, and of its fillingits destined place with credit to them both--a standing memorial of thebeauty of one, the skill of the other, and the friendship of both;with as many other agreeable associations as Mr. Elton's very promisingattachment was likely to add.Harriet was to sit again the next day; and Mr. Elton, just as he ought,entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again]
 [By all means. We shall be most happy to consider you as one of theparty]
 [The same civilities and courtesies, the same success and satisfaction,took place on the morrow, and accompanied the whole progress of thepicture, which was rapid and happy. Every body who saw it was pleased,but Mr. Elton was in continual raptures, and defended it through everycriticism]
 [Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty shewanted,"--observed Mrs. Weston to him--not in the least suspecting thatshe was addressing a lover.--"The expression of the eye is most correct,but Miss Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes. It is the fault ofher face that she has them not]
 ["Do you think so?" replied he. "I cannot agree with you. It appearsto me a most perfect resemblance in every feature. I never saw such alikeness in my life. We must allow for the effect of shade, you know]
 ["You have made her too tall, Emma," said Mr. Knightley.Emma knew that she had, but would not own it; and Mr. Elton warmlyadded,"Oh no! certainly not too tall; not in the least too tall. Consider, sheis sitting down--which naturally presents a different--which in shortgives exactly the idea--and the proportions must be preserved, you know.Proportions, fore-shortening.--Oh no! it gives one exactly the idea ofsuch a height as Miss Smith's. Exactly so indeed!""It is very pretty," said Mr. Woodhouse. "So prettily done! Just as yourdrawings always are, my dear. I do not know any body who draws so wellas you do. The only thing I do not thoroughly like is, that she seemsto be sitting out of doors, with only a little shawl over hershoulders--and it makes one think she must catch cold]
 ["But, my dear papa, it is supposed to be summer; a warm day in summer.Look at the tree]
 ["But it is never safe to sit out of doors, my dear]
 ["You, sir, may say any thing," cried Mr. Elton, "but I must confess thatI regard it as a most happy thought, the placing of Miss Smith out ofdoors; and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit! Any othersituation would have been much less in character. The naivete of MissSmith's manners--and altogether--Oh, it is most admirable! I cannot keepmy eyes from it. I never saw such a likeness]
 [The next thing wanted was to get the picture framed; and here were a fewdifficulties. It must be done directly; it must be done in London; theorder must go through the hands of some intelligent person whose tastecould be depended on; and Isabella, the usual doer of all commissions,must not be applied to, because it was December, and Mr. Woodhousecould not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in the fogs ofDecember. But no sooner was the distress known to Mr. Elton, than itwas removed. His gallantry was always on the alert. "Might he be trustedwith the commission, what infinite pleasure should he have in executingit! he could ride to London at any time. It was impossible to say howmuch he should be gratified by being employed on such an errand]
 ["He was too good!--she could not endure the thought!--she would not givehim such a troublesome office for the world,"--brought on the desiredrepetition of entreaties and assurances,--and a very few minutes settledthe business.Mr. Elton was to take the drawing to London, chuse the frame, and givethe directions; and Emma thought she could so pack it as to ensure itssafety without much incommoding him, while he seemed mostly fearful ofnot being incommoded enough]
 [What a precious deposit!" said he with a tender sigh, as he receivedit]
 [This man is almost too gallant to be in love," thought Emma. "I shouldsay so, but that I suppose there may be a hundred different ways ofbeing in love. He is an excellent young man, and will suit Harrietexactly; it will be an 'Exactly so,' as he says himself; but he doessigh and languish, and study for compliments rather more than I couldendure as a principal. I come in for a pretty good share as a second.But it is his gratitude on Harriet's account]
 [CHAPTER VIIThe very day of Mr. Elton's going to London produced a fresh occasionfor Emma's services towards her friend. Harriet had been at Hartfield,as usual, soon after breakfast; and, after a time, had gone home toreturn again to dinner: she returned, and sooner than had beentalked of, and with an agitated, hurried look, announcing somethingextraordinary to have happened which she was longing to tell. Half aminute brought it all out. She had heard, as soon as she got back toMrs. Goddard's, that Mr. Martin had been there an hour before, andfinding she was not at home, nor particularly expected, had left alittle parcel for her from one of his sisters, and gone away; and onopening this parcel, she had actually found, besides the two songs whichshe had lent Elizabeth to copy, a letter to herself; and this letter wasfrom him, from Mr. Martin, and contained a direct proposal of marriage]
 [Who could have thought it? She was so surprized she did not know whatto do. Yes, quite a proposal of marriage; and a very good letter,at least she thought so. And he wrote as if he really loved her verymuch--but she did not know--and so, she was come as fast as she could toask Miss Woodhouse what she should do.--" Emma was half-ashamed of herfriend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful]
 [Upon my word," she cried, "the young man is determined not to lose anything for want of asking. He will connect himself well if he can]
 ["Will you read the letter?" cried Harriet. "Pray do. I'd rather youwould]
 [Emma was not sorry to be pressed. She read, and was surprized. The styleof the letter was much above her expectation. There were not merely nogrammatical errors, but as a composition it would not have disgraced agentleman; the language, though plain, was strong and unaffected, andthe sentiments it conveyed very much to the credit of the writer. It wasshort, but expressed good sense, warm attachment, liberality, propriety,even delicacy of feeling. She paused over it, while Harriet stoodanxiously watching for her opinion, with a "Well, well," and was at lastforced to add, "Is it a good letter? or is it too short?""Yes, indeed, a very good letter," replied Emma rather slowly--"sogood a letter, Harriet, that every thing considered, I think one of hissisters must have helped him. I can hardly imagine the young man whomI saw talking with you the other day could express himself so well, ifleft quite to his own powers, and yet it is not the style of a woman;no, certainly, it is too strong and concise; not diffuse enough for awoman. No doubt he is a sensible man, and I suppose may have a naturaltalent for--thinks strongly and clearly--and when he takes a pen inhand, his thoughts naturally find proper words. It is so with some men.Yes, I understand the sort of mind. Vigorous, decided, with sentimentsto a certain point, not coarse. A better written letter, Harriet(returning it,) than I had expected]
 ["Well," said the still waiting Harriet;--"well--and--and what shall Ido?""What shall you do! In what respect? Do you mean with regard to thisletter?""Yes]
 ["But what are you in doubt of? You must answer it of course--andspeedily]
 ["Yes. But what shall I say? Dear Miss Woodhouse, do advise me]
 ["Oh no, no! the letter had much better be all your own. You will expressyourself very properly, I am sure. There is no danger of your notbeing intelligible, which is the first thing. Your meaning must beunequivocal; no doubts or demurs: and such expressions of gratitudeand concern for the pain you are inflicting as propriety requires, willpresent themselves unbidden to _your_ mind, I am persuaded. You neednot be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrow for hisdisappointment]
 ["You think I ought to refuse him then," said Harriet, looking down]
 [Ought to refuse him! My dear Harriet, what do you mean? Are you in anydoubt as to that? I thought--but I beg your pardon, perhaps I have beenunder a mistake. I certainly have been misunderstanding you, if you feelin doubt as to the _purport_ of your answer. I had imagined you wereconsulting me only as to the wording of it]
 [Harriet was silent. With a little reserve of manner, Emma continued:"You mean to return a favourable answer, I collect]
 ["No, I do not; that is, I do not mean--What shall I do? What would youadvise me to do? Pray, dear Miss Woodhouse, tell me what I ought to do]
 ["I shall not give you any advice, Harriet. I will have nothing to dowith it. This is a point which you must settle with your feelings]
 ["I had no notion that he liked me so very much," said Harriet,contemplating the letter. For a little while Emma persevered in hersilence; but beginning to apprehend the bewitching flattery of thatletter might be too powerful, she thought it best to say,"I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a woman _doubts_ asto whether she should accept a man or not, she certainly ought to refusehim. If she can hesitate as to 'Yes,' she ought to say 'No' directly.It is not a state to be safely entered into with doubtful feelings, withhalf a heart. I thought it my duty as a friend, and older than yourself,to say thus much to you. But do not imagine that I want to influenceyou]
 ["Oh! no, I am sure you are a great deal too kind to--but if you wouldjust advise me what I had best do--No, no, I do not mean that--Asyou say, one's mind ought to be quite made up--One should not behesitating--It is a very serious thing.--It will be safer to say 'No,'perhaps.--Do you think I had better say 'No?'""Not for the world," said Emma, smiling graciously, "would I advise youeither way. You must be the best judge of your own happiness. If youprefer Mr. Martin to every other person; if you think him the mostagreeable man you have ever been in company with, why should youhesitate? You blush, Harriet.--Does any body else occur to you atthis moment under such a definition? Harriet, Harriet, do not deceiveyourself; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion. At thismoment whom are you thinking of?"The symptoms were favourable.--Instead of answering, Harriet turned awayconfused, and stood thoughtfully by the fire; and though the letter wasstill in her hand, it was now mechanically twisted about without regard.Emma waited the result with impatience, but not without strong hopes. Atlast, with some hesitation, Harriet said--"Miss Woodhouse, as you will not give me your opinion, I must do as wellas I can by myself; and I have now quite determined, and really almostmade up my mind--to refuse Mr. Martin. Do you think I am right?""Perfectly, perfectly right, my dearest Harriet; you are doing justwhat you ought. While you were at all in suspense I kept my feelings tomyself, but now that you are so completely decided I have no hesitationin approving. Dear Harriet, I give myself joy of this. It wouldhave grieved me to lose your acquaintance, which must have been theconsequence of your marrying Mr. Martin. While you were in the smallestdegree wavering, I said nothing about it, because I would not influence;but it would have been the loss of a friend to me. I could not havevisited Mrs. Robert Martin, of Abbey-Mill Farm. Now I am secure of youfor ever]
 [Harriet had not surmised her own danger, but the idea of it struck herforcibly]
 [You could not have visited me!" she cried, looking aghast. "No, to besure you could not; but I never thought of that before. That would havebeen too dreadful!--What an escape!--Dear Miss Woodhouse, I would notgive up the pleasure and honour of being intimate with you for any thingin the world]
 ["Indeed, Harriet, it would have been a severe pang to lose you; but itmust have been. You would have thrown yourself out of all good society.I must have given you up]
 ["Dear me!--How should I ever have borne it! It would have killed menever to come to Hartfield any more!""Dear affectionate creature!--_You_ banished to Abbey-Mill Farm!--_You_confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life! Iwonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it. He musthave a pretty good opinion of himself]
 ["I do not think he is conceited either, in general," said Harriet, herconscience opposing such censure; "at least, he is very good natured,and I shall always feel much obliged to him, and have a great regardfor--but that is quite a different thing from--and you know, thoughhe may like me, it does not follow that I should--and certainly I mustconfess that since my visiting here I have seen people--and if one comesto compare them, person and manners, there is no comparison at all,_one_ is so very handsome and agreeable. However, I do really think Mr.Martin a very amiable young man, and have a great opinion of him; andhis being so much attached to me--and his writing such a letter--but asto leaving you, it is what I would not do upon any consideration]
 ["Thank you, thank you, my own sweet little friend. We will not beparted. A woman is not to marry a man merely because she is asked, orbecause he is attached to her, and can write a tolerable letter]
 ["Oh no;--and it is but a short letter too]
 [Emma felt the bad taste of her friend, but let it pass with a "verytrue; and it would be a small consolation to her, for the clownishmanner which might be offending her every hour of the day, to know thather husband could write a good letter]
 ["Oh! yes, very. Nobody cares for a letter; the thing is, to be alwayshappy with pleasant companions. I am quite determined to refuse him. Buthow shall I do? What shall I say?"Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answer, and advisedits being written directly, which was agreed to, in the hope of herassistance; and though Emma continued to protest against any assistancebeing wanted, it was in fact given in the formation of every sentence.The looking over his letter again, in replying to it, had such asoftening tendency, that it was particularly necessary to brace her upwith a few decisive expressions; and she was so very much concerned atthe idea of making him unhappy, and thought so much of what his motherand sisters would think and say, and was so anxious that they should notfancy her ungrateful, that Emma believed if the young man had come inher way at that moment, he would have been accepted after all.This letter, however, was written, and sealed, and sent. The businesswas finished, and Harriet safe. She was rather low all the evening, butEmma could allow for her amiable regrets, and sometimes relieved them byspeaking of her own affection, sometimes by bringing forward the idea ofMr. Elton]
 [I shall never be invited to Abbey-Mill again," was said in rather asorrowful tone]
 [Nor, if you were, could I ever bear to part with you, my Harriet. Youare a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spared to Abbey-Mill]
 ["And I am sure I should never want to go there; for I am never happy butat Hartfield]
 [Some time afterwards it was, "I think Mrs. Goddard would be very muchsurprized if she knew what had happened. I am sure Miss Nash would--forMiss Nash thinks her own sister very well married, and it is only alinen-draper]
 ["One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacherof a school, Harriet. I dare say Miss Nash would envy you such anopportunity as this of being married. Even this conquest would appearvaluable in her eyes. As to any thing superior for you, I suppose sheis quite in the dark. The attentions of a certain person can hardly beamong the tittle-tattle of Highbury yet. Hitherto I fancy you and Iare the only people to whom his looks and manners have explainedthemselves]
 [Harriet blushed and smiled, and said something about wondering thatpeople should like her so much. The idea of Mr. Elton was certainlycheering; but still, after a time, she was tender-hearted again towardsthe rejected Mr. Martin]
 [Now he has got my letter," said she softly. "I wonder what they are alldoing--whether his sisters know--if he is unhappy, they will be unhappytoo. I hope he will not mind it so very much]
 ["Let us think of those among our absent friends who are more cheerfullyemployed," cried Emma. "At this moment, perhaps, Mr. Elton is shewingyour picture to his mother and sisters, telling how much more beautifulis the original, and after being asked for it five or six times,allowing them to hear your name, your own dear name]
 ["My picture!--But he has left my picture in Bond-street]
 ["Has he so!--Then I know nothing of Mr. Elton. No, my dear little modestHarriet, depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond-street tilljust before he mounts his horse to-morrow. It is his companion all thisevening, his solace, his delight. It opens his designs to his family,it introduces you among them, it diffuses through the party thosepleasantest feelings of our nature, eager curiosity and warmprepossession. How cheerful, how animated, how suspicious, how busytheir imaginations all are!"Harriet smiled again, and her smiles grew stronger.CHAPTER VIIIHarriet slept at Hartfield that night. For some weeks past she had beenspending more than half her time there, and gradually getting to havea bed-room appropriated to herself; and Emma judged it best in everyrespect, safest and kindest, to keep her with them as much as possiblejust at present. She was obliged to go the next morning for an hour ortwo to Mrs. Goddard's, but it was then to be settled that she shouldreturn to Hartfield, to make a regular visit of some days.While she was gone, Mr. Knightley called, and sat some time with Mr.Woodhouse and Emma, till Mr. Woodhouse, who had previously made up hismind to walk out, was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it, and wasinduced by the entreaties of both, though against the scruples of hisown civility, to leave Mr. Knightley for that purpose. Mr. Knightley,who had nothing of ceremony about him, was offering by his short,decided answers, an amusing contrast to the protracted apologies andcivil hesitations of the other]
 [Well, I believe, if you will excuse me, Mr. Knightley, if you will notconsider me as doing a very rude thing, I shall take Emma's advice andgo out for a quarter of an hour. As the sun is out, I believe I hadbetter take my three turns while I can. I treat you without ceremony,Mr. Knightley. We invalids think we are privileged people]
 ["My dear sir, do not make a stranger of me]
 ["I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter. Emma will be happy toentertain you. And therefore I think I will beg your excuse and take mythree turns--my winter walk]
 ["You cannot do better, sir]
 ["I would ask for the pleasure of your company, Mr. Knightley, but I am avery slow walker, and my pace would be tedious to you; and, besides, youhave another long walk before you, to Donwell Abbey]
 ["Thank you, sir, thank you; I am going this moment myself; and I thinkthe sooner _you_ go the better. I will fetch your greatcoat and open thegarden door for you]
 [Mr. Woodhouse at last was off; but Mr. Knightley, instead of beingimmediately off likewise, sat down again, seemingly inclined for morechat. He began speaking of Harriet, and speaking of her with morevoluntary praise than Emma had ever heard before]
 [I cannot rate her beauty as you do," said he; "but she is apretty little creature, and I am inclined to think very well of herdisposition. Her character depends upon those she is with; but in goodhands she will turn out a valuable woman]
 ["I am glad you think so; and the good hands, I hope, may not bewanting]
 ["Come," said he, "you are anxious for a compliment, so I will tell youthat you have improved her. You have cured her of her school-girl'sgiggle; she really does you credit]
 ["Thank you. I should be mortified indeed if I did not believe I had beenof some use; but it is not every body who will bestow praise where theymay. _You_ do not often overpower me with it]
 ["You are expecting her again, you say, this morning?""Almost every moment. She has been gone longer already than sheintended]
 ["Something has happened to delay her; some visitors perhaps]
 ["Highbury gossips!--Tiresome wretches!""Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would]
 [Emma knew this was too true for contradiction, and therefore saidnothing. He presently added, with a smile,"I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I must tell you thatI have good reason to believe your little friend will soon hear ofsomething to her advantage]
 ["Indeed! how so? of what sort?""A very serious sort, I assure you;" still smiling]
 [Very serious! I can think of but one thing--Who is in love with her?Who makes you their confidant?"Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr. Elton's having dropt a hint.Mr. Knightley was a sort of general friend and adviser, and she knew Mr.Elton looked up to him]
 [I have reason to think," he replied, "that Harriet Smith will soon havean offer of marriage, and from a most unexceptionable quarter:--RobertMartin is the man. Her visit to Abbey-Mill, this summer, seems to havedone his business. He is desperately in love and means to marry her]
 ["He is very obliging," said Emma; "but is he sure that Harriet means tomarry him?""Well, well, means to make her an offer then. Will that do? He came tothe Abbey two evenings ago, on purpose to consult me about it. He knowsI have a thorough regard for him and all his family, and, I believe,considers me as one of his best friends. He came to ask me whetherI thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so early; whetherI thought her too young: in short, whether I approved his choicealtogether; having some apprehension perhaps of her being considered(especially since _your_ making so much of her) as in a line of societyabove him. I was very much pleased with all that he said. I never hearbetter sense from any one than Robert Martin. He always speaks to thepurpose; open, straightforward, and very well judging. He told me everything; his circumstances and plans, and what they all proposed doing inthe event of his marriage. He is an excellent young man, both as son andbrother. I had no hesitation in advising him to marry. He proved to methat he could afford it; and that being the case, I was convinced hecould not do better. I praised the fair lady too, and altogether senthim away very happy. If he had never esteemed my opinion before, hewould have thought highly of me then; and, I dare say, left the housethinking me the best friend and counsellor man ever had. This happenedthe night before last. Now, as we may fairly suppose, he would not allowmuch time to pass before he spoke to the lady, and as he does not appearto have spoken yesterday, it is not unlikely that he should be at Mrs.Goddard's to-day; and she may be detained by a visitor, without thinkinghim at all a tiresome wretch]
 ["Pray, Mr. Knightley," said Emma, who had been smiling to herselfthrough a great part of this speech, "how do you know that Mr. Martindid not speak yesterday?""Certainly," replied he, surprized, "I do not absolutely know it; but itmay be inferred. Was not she the whole day with you?""Come," said she, "I will tell you something, in return for whatyou have told me. He did speak yesterday--that is, he wrote, and wasrefused]
 [This was obliged to be repeated before it could be believed; and Mr.Knightley actually looked red with surprize and displeasure, as he stoodup, in tall indignation, and said,"Then she is a greater simpleton than I ever believed her. What is thefoolish girl about?""Oh! to be sure," cried Emma, "it is always incomprehensible to a manthat a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage. A man alwaysimagines a woman to be ready for any body who asks her]
 ["Nonsense! a man does not imagine any such thing. But what is themeaning of this? Harriet Smith refuse Robert Martin? madness, if it isso; but I hope you are mistaken]
 ["I saw her answer!--nothing could be clearer]
 ["You saw her answer!--you wrote her answer too. Emma, this is yourdoing. You persuaded her to refuse him]
 ["And if I did, (which, however, I am far from allowing) I should notfeel that I had done wrong. Mr. Martin is a very respectable young man,but I cannot admit him to be Harriet's equal; and am rather surprizedindeed that he should have ventured to address her. By your account, hedoes seem to have had some scruples. It is a pity that they were evergot over]
 ["Not Harriet's equal!" exclaimed Mr. Knightley loudly and warmly; andwith calmer asperity, added, a few moments afterwards, "No, he isnot her equal indeed, for he is as much her superior in sense as insituation. Emma, your infatuation about that girl blinds you. What areHarriet Smith's claims, either of birth, nature or education, to anyconnexion higher than Robert Martin? She is the natural daughter ofnobody knows whom, with probably no settled provision at all, andcertainly no respectable relations. She is known only as parlour-boarderat a common school. She is not a sensible girl, nor a girl of anyinformation. She has been taught nothing useful, and is too young andtoo simple to have acquired any thing herself. At her age she can haveno experience, and with her little wit, is not very likely ever to haveany that can avail her. She is pretty, and she is good tempered, andthat is all. My only scruple in advising the match was on his account,as being beneath his deserts, and a bad connexion for him. I felt that,as to fortune, in all probability he might do much better; and that asto a rational companion or useful helpmate, he could not do worse. But Icould not reason so to a man in love, and was willing to trust to therebeing no harm in her, to her having that sort of disposition, which, ingood hands, like his, might be easily led aright and turn out very well.The advantage of the match I felt to be all on her side; and had not thesmallest doubt (nor have I now) that there would be a general cry-outupon her extreme good luck. Even _your_ satisfaction I made sure of.It crossed my mind immediately that you would not regret your friend'sleaving Highbury, for the sake of her being settled so well. I remembersaying to myself, 'Even Emma, with all her partiality for Harriet, willthink this a good match]
 [""I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say anysuch thing. What! think a farmer, (and with all his sense and all hismerit Mr. Martin is nothing more,) a good match for my intimate friend!Not regret her leaving Highbury for the sake of marrying a man whomI could never admit as an acquaintance of my own! I wonder you shouldthink it possible for me to have such feelings. I assure you mine arevery different. I must think your statement by no means fair. You arenot just to Harriet's claims. They would be estimated very differentlyby others as well as myself; Mr. Martin may be the richest of the two,but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank in society.--The sphere inwhich she moves is much above his.--It would be a degradation]
 ["A degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance, to be married to arespectable, intelligent gentleman-farmer!""As to the circumstances of her birth, though in a legal sense she maybe called Nobody, it will not hold in common sense. She is not to payfor the offence of others, by being held below the level of those withwhom she is brought up.--There can scarcely be a doubt that her fatheris a gentleman--and a gentleman of fortune.--Her allowance isvery liberal; nothing has ever been grudged for her improvement orcomfort.--That she is a gentleman's daughter, is indubitable to me; thatshe associates with gentlemen's daughters, no one, I apprehend, willdeny.--She is superior to Mr. Robert Martin]
 ["Whoever might be her parents," said Mr. Knightley, "whoever may havehad the charge of her, it does not appear to have been any part oftheir plan to introduce her into what you would call good society. Afterreceiving a very indifferent education she is left in Mrs. Goddard'shands to shift as she can;--to move, in short, in Mrs. Goddard's line,to have Mrs. Goddard's acquaintance. Her friends evidently thoughtthis good enough for her; and it _was_ good enough. She desired nothingbetter herself. Till you chose to turn her into a friend, her mind hadno distaste for her own set, nor any ambition beyond it. She was ashappy as possible with the Martins in the summer. She had no sense ofsuperiority then. If she has it now, you have given it. You have been nofriend to Harriet Smith, Emma. Robert Martin would never have proceededso far, if he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined tohim. I know him well. He has too much real feeling to address anywoman on the haphazard of selfish passion. And as to conceit, he isthe farthest from it of any man I know. Depend upon it he hadencouragement]
 [It was most convenient to Emma not to make a direct reply to thisassertion; she chose rather to take up her own line of the subjectagain]
 [You are a very warm friend to Mr. Martin; but, as I said before,are unjust to Harriet. Harriet's claims to marry well are not socontemptible as you represent them. She is not a clever girl, but shehas better sense than you are aware of, and does not deserve to have herunderstanding spoken of so slightingly. Waiving that point, however, andsupposing her to be, as you describe her, only pretty and good-natured,let me tell you, that in the degree she possesses them, they are nottrivial recommendations to the world in general, for she is, in fact, abeautiful girl, and must be thought so by ninety-nine people out of anhundred; and till it appears that men are much more philosophic on thesubject of beauty than they are generally supposed; till they do fallin love with well-informed minds instead of handsome faces, a girl, withsuch loveliness as Harriet, has a certainty of being admired and soughtafter, of having the power of chusing from among many, consequently aclaim to be nice. Her good-nature, too, is not so very slight a claim,comprehending, as it does, real, thorough sweetness of temper andmanner, a very humble opinion of herself, and a great readiness tobe pleased with other people. I am very much mistaken if your sex ingeneral would not think such beauty, and such temper, the highest claimsa woman could possess]
 ["Upon my word, Emma, to hear you abusing the reason you have, is almostenough to make me think so too. Better be without sense, than misapplyit as you do]
 ["To be sure!" cried she playfully. "I know _that_ is the feeling ofyou all. I know that such a girl as Harriet is exactly what everyman delights in--what at once bewitches his senses and satisfies hisjudgment. Oh! Harriet may pick and chuse. Were you, yourself, ever tomarry, she is the very woman for you. And is she, at seventeen, justentering into life, just beginning to be known, to be wondered atbecause she does not accept the first offer she receives? No--pray lether have time to look about her]
 ["I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy," said Mr. Knightleypresently, "though I have kept my thoughts to myself; but I now perceivethat it will be a very unfortunate one for Harriet. You will puff her upwith such ideas of her own beauty, and of what she has a claim to, that,in a little while, nobody within her reach will be good enough for her.Vanity working on a weak head, produces every sort of mischief. Nothingso easy as for a young lady to raise her expectations too high. MissHarriet Smith may not find offers of marriage flow in so fast, thoughshe is a very pretty girl. Men of sense, whatever you may chuse tosay, do not want silly wives. Men of family would not be very fond ofconnecting themselves with a girl of such obscurity--and most prudentmen would be afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they might beinvolved in, when the mystery of her parentage came to be revealed. Lether marry Robert Martin, and she is safe, respectable, and happy forever; but if you encourage her to expect to marry greatly, and teach herto be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequence and largefortune, she may be a parlour-boarder at Mrs. Goddard's all the restof her life--or, at least, (for Harriet Smith is a girl who will marrysomebody or other,) till she grow desperate, and is glad to catch at theold writing-master's son]
 ["We think so very differently on this point, Mr. Knightley, that therecan be no use in canvassing it. We shall only be making each other moreangry. But as to my _letting_ her marry Robert Martin, it is impossible;she has refused him, and so decidedly, I think, as must prevent anysecond application. She must abide by the evil of having refused him,whatever it may be; and as to the refusal itself, I will not pretend tosay that I might not influence her a little; but I assure you therewas very little for me or for any body to do. His appearance is so muchagainst him, and his manner so bad, that if she ever were disposed tofavour him, she is not now. I can imagine, that before she had seenany body superior, she might tolerate him. He was the brother of herfriends, and he took pains to please her; and altogether, having seennobody better (that must have been his great assistant) she might not,while she was at Abbey-Mill, find him disagreeable. But the caseis altered now. She knows now what gentlemen are; and nothing but agentleman in education and manner has any chance with Harriet]
 ["Nonsense, errant nonsense, as ever was talked!" cried Mr.Knightley.--"Robert Martin's manners have sense, sincerity, andgood-humour to recommend them; and his mind has more true gentility thanHarriet Smith could understand]
 [Emma made no answer, and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned, but wasreally feeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone. Shedid not repent what she had done; she still thought herself a betterjudge of such a point of female right and refinement than he could be;but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for his judgment in general,which made her dislike having it so loudly against her; and to have himsitting just opposite to her in angry state, was very disagreeable.Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence, with only one attempton Emma's side to talk of the weather, but he made no answer. He wasthinking. The result of his thoughts appeared at last in these words]
 [Robert Martin has no great loss--if he can but think so; and I hope itwill not be long before he does. Your views for Harriet are best knownto yourself; but as you make no secret of your love of match-making, itis fair to suppose that views, and plans, and projects you have;--and asa friend I shall just hint to you that if Elton is the man, I think itwill be all labour in vain]
 [Emma laughed and disclaimed. He continued,"Depend upon it, Elton will not do. Elton is a very good sort of man,and a very respectable vicar of Highbury, but not at all likely to makean imprudent match. He knows the value of a good income as well as anybody. Elton may talk sentimentally, but he will act rationally. He isas well acquainted with his own claims, as you can be with Harriet's.He knows that he is a very handsome young man, and a great favouritewherever he goes; and from his general way of talking in unreservedmoments, when there are only men present, I am convinced that he doesnot mean to throw himself away. I have heard him speak with greatanimation of a large family of young ladies that his sisters areintimate with, who have all twenty thousand pounds apiece]
 ["I am very much obliged to you," said Emma, laughing again. "If I hadset my heart on Mr. Elton's marrying Harriet, it would have been verykind to open my eyes; but at present I only want to keep Harriet tomyself. I have done with match-making indeed. I could never hope toequal my own doings at Randalls. I shall leave off while I am well]
 ["Good morning to you,"--said he, rising and walking off abruptly. He wasvery much vexed. He felt the disappointment of the young man, and wasmortified to have been the means of promoting it, by the sanction he hadgiven; and the part which he was persuaded Emma had taken in the affair,was provoking him exceedingly.Emma remained in a state of vexation too; but there was moreindistinctness in the causes of her's, than in his. She did not alwaysfeel so absolutely satisfied with herself, so entirely convinced thather opinions were right and her adversary's wrong, as Mr. Knightley. Hewalked off in more complete self-approbation than he left for her. Shewas not so materially cast down, however, but that a little time andthe return of Harriet were very adequate restoratives. Harriet's stayingaway so long was beginning to make her uneasy. The possibility of theyoung man's coming to Mrs. Goddard's that morning, and meeting withHarriet and pleading his own cause, gave alarming ideas. The dreadof such a failure after all became the prominent uneasiness; and whenHarriet appeared, and in very good spirits, and without having anysuch reason to give for her long absence, she felt a satisfaction whichsettled her with her own mind, and convinced her, that let Mr.Knightley think or say what he would, she had done nothing which woman'sfriendship and woman's feelings would not justify.He had frightened her a little about Mr. Elton; but when she consideredthat Mr. Knightley could not have observed him as she had done, neitherwith the interest, nor (she must be allowed to tell herself, in spite ofMr. Knightley's pretensions) with the skill of such an observer on sucha question as herself, that he had spoken it hastily and in anger, shewas able to believe, that he had rather said what he wished resentfullyto be true, than what he knew any thing about. He certainly might haveheard Mr. Elton speak with more unreserve than she had ever done, andMr. Elton might not be of an imprudent, inconsiderate disposition as tomoney matters; he might naturally be rather attentive than otherwiseto them; but then, Mr. Knightley did not make due allowance for theinfluence of a strong passion at war with all interested motives. Mr.Knightley saw no such passion, and of course thought nothing of itseffects; but she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcomingany hesitations that a reasonable prudence might originally suggest; andmore than a reasonable, becoming degree of prudence, she was very suredid not belong to Mr. Elton.Harriet's cheerful look and manner established hers: she came back, notto think of Mr. Martin, but to talk of Mr. Elton. Miss Nash had beentelling her something, which she repeated immediately with greatdelight. Mr. Perry had been to Mrs. Goddard's to attend a sick child,and Miss Nash had seen him, and he had told Miss Nash, that as he wascoming back yesterday from Clayton Park, he had met Mr. Elton, andfound to his great surprize, that Mr. Elton was actually on his roadto London, and not meaning to return till the morrow, though it was thewhist-club night, which he had been never known to miss before; and Mr.Perry had remonstrated with him about it, and told him how shabby itwas in him, their best player, to absent himself, and tried very much topersuade him to put off his journey only one day; but it would notdo; Mr. Elton had been determined to go on, and had said in a _very__particular_ way indeed, that he was going on business which he wouldnot put off for any inducement in the world; and something about avery enviable commission, and being the bearer of something exceedinglyprecious. Mr. Perry could not quite understand him, but he was very surethere must be a _lady_ in the case, and he told him so; and Mr. Eltononly looked very conscious and smiling, and rode off in great spirits.Miss Nash had told her all this, and had talked a great deal more aboutMr. Elton; and said, looking so very significantly at her, "that she didnot pretend to understand what his business might be, but she onlyknew that any woman whom Mr. Elton could prefer, she should think theluckiest woman in the world; for, beyond a doubt, Mr. Elton had not hisequal for beauty or agreeableness]
 [CHAPTER IXMr. Knightley might quarrel with her, but Emma could not quarrel withherself. He was so much displeased, that it was longer than usual beforehe came to Hartfield again; and when they did meet, his grave looksshewed that she was not forgiven. She was sorry, but could not repent.On the contrary, her plans and proceedings were more and more justifiedand endeared to her by the general appearances of the next few days.The Picture, elegantly framed, came safely to hand soon after Mr.Elton's return, and being hung over the mantelpiece of the commonsitting-room, he got up to look at it, and sighed out his half sentencesof admiration just as he ought; and as for Harriet's feelings, they werevisibly forming themselves into as strong and steady an attachment asher youth and sort of mind admitted. Emma was soon perfectly satisfiedof Mr. Martin's being no otherwise remembered, than as he furnished acontrast with Mr. Elton, of the utmost advantage to the latter.Her views of improving her little friend's mind, by a great deal ofuseful reading and conversation, had never yet led to more than a fewfirst chapters, and the intention of going on to-morrow. It was mucheasier to chat than to study; much pleasanter to let her imaginationrange and work at Harriet's fortune, than to be labouring to enlargeher comprehension or exercise it on sober facts; and the only literarypursuit which engaged Harriet at present, the only mental provision shewas making for the evening of life, was the collecting and transcribingall the riddles of every sort that she could meet with, into a thinquarto of hot-pressed paper, made up by her friend, and ornamented withciphers and trophies.In this age of literature, such collections on a very grand scale arenot uncommon. Miss Nash, head-teacher at Mrs. Goddard's, had written outat least three hundred; and Harriet, who had taken the first hint of itfrom her, hoped, with Miss Woodhouse's help, to get a great many more.Emma assisted with her invention, memory and taste; and as Harriet wrotea very pretty hand, it was likely to be an arrangement of the firstorder, in form as well as quantity.Mr. Woodhouse was almost as much interested in the business as thegirls, and tried very often to recollect something worth their puttingin. "So many clever riddles as there used to be when he was young--hewondered he could not remember them! but he hoped he should in time]
 [And it always ended in "Kitty, a fair but frozen maid]
 [His good friend Perry, too, whom he had spoken to on the subject,did not at present recollect any thing of the riddle kind; but hehad desired Perry to be upon the watch, and as he went about so much,something, he thought, might come from that quarter.It was by no means his daughter's wish that the intellects of Highburyin general should be put under requisition. Mr. Elton was the only onewhose assistance she asked. He was invited to contribute any really goodenigmas, charades, or conundrums that he might recollect; and she hadthe pleasure of seeing him most intently at work with his recollections;and at the same time, as she could perceive, most earnestly careful thatnothing ungallant, nothing that did not breathe a compliment to thesex should pass his lips. They owed to him their two or three politestpuzzles; and the joy and exultation with which at last he recalled, andrather sentimentally recited, that well-known charade,    My first doth affliction denote,      Which my second is destin'd to feel    And my whole is the best antidote      That affliction to soften and heal.--made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed it somepages ago already]
 [Why will not you write one yourself for us, Mr. Elton?" said she; "thatis the only security for its freshness; and nothing could be easier toyou]
 ["Oh no! he had never written, hardly ever, any thing of the kind in hislife. The stupidest fellow! He was afraid not even Miss Woodhouse"--hestopt a moment--"or Miss Smith could inspire him]
 [The very next day however produced some proof of inspiration. Hecalled for a few moments, just to leave a piece of paper on the tablecontaining, as he said, a charade, which a friend of his had addressedto a young lady, the object of his admiration, but which, from hismanner, Emma was immediately convinced must be his own]
 [I do not offer it for Miss Smith's collection," said he. "Being myfriend's, I have no right to expose it in any degree to the public eye,but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it]
 [The speech was more to Emma than to Harriet, which Emma couldunderstand. There was deep consciousness about him, and he foundit easier to meet her eye than her friend's. He was gone the nextmoment:--after another moment's pause,"Take it," said Emma, smiling, and pushing the paper towardsHarriet--"it is for you. Take your own]
 [But Harriet was in a tremor, and could not touch it; and Emma, neverloth to be first, was obliged to examine it herself]
 [      To Miss--          CHARADE]
 [  My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,      Lords of the earth! their luxury and ease]
 [  Another view of man, my second brings,      Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!    But ah! united, what reverse we have!      Man's boasted power and freedom, all are flown;    Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,      And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone]
 [    Thy ready wit the word will soon supply,      May its approval beam in that soft eye!She cast her eye over it, pondered, caught the meaning, read it throughagain to be quite certain, and quite mistress of the lines, and thenpassing it to Harriet, sat happily smiling, and saying to herself, whileHarriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion of hope anddulness, "Very well, Mr. Elton, very well indeed. I have read worsecharades. _Courtship_--a very good hint. I give you credit for it. Thisis feeling your way. This is saying very plainly--'Pray, Miss Smith,give me leave to pay my addresses to you. Approve my charade and myintentions in the same glance]
 [      May its approval beam in that soft eye!Harriet exactly. Soft is the very word for her eye--of all epithets, thejustest that could be given]
 [    Thy ready wit the word will soon supply.Humph--Harriet's ready wit! All the better. A man must be very much inlove, indeed, to describe her so. Ah! Mr. Knightley, I wish you had thebenefit of this; I think this would convince you. For once in your lifeyou would be obliged to own yourself mistaken. An excellent charadeindeed! and very much to the purpose. Things must come to a crisis soonnow]
 [She was obliged to break off from these very pleasant observations,which were otherwise of a sort to run into great length, by theeagerness of Harriet's wondering questions]
 [What can it be, Miss Woodhouse?--what can it be? I have not an idea--Icannot guess it in the least. What can it possibly be? Do try to findit out, Miss Woodhouse. Do help me. I never saw any thing so hard. Is itkingdom? I wonder who the friend was--and who could be the young lady.Do you think it is a good one? Can it be woman?      And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.Can it be Neptune?      Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!Or a trident? or a mermaid? or a shark? Oh, no! shark is only onesyllable. It must be very clever, or he would not have brought it. Oh!Miss Woodhouse, do you think we shall ever find it out?""Mermaids and sharks! Nonsense! My dear Harriet, what are you thinkingof? Where would be the use of his bringing us a charade made by a friendupon a mermaid or a shark? Give me the paper and listen.For Miss ------, read Miss Smith]
 [  My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,      Lords of the earth! their luxury and ease.That is _court_]
 [  Another view of man, my second brings;      Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!That is _ship_;--plain as it can be.--Now for the cream]
 [  But ah! united, (_courtship_, you know,) what reverse we have!      Man's boasted power and freedom, all are flown]
 [  Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,      And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.A very proper compliment!--and then follows the application, whichI think, my dear Harriet, you cannot find much difficulty incomprehending. Read it in comfort to yourself. There can be no doubt ofits being written for you and to you]
 [Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion. She readthe concluding lines, and was all flutter and happiness. She could notspeak. But she was not wanted to speak. It was enough for her to feel.Emma spoke for her]
 [There is so pointed, and so particular a meaning in this compliment,"said she, "that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr. Elton's intentions. Youare his object--and you will soon receive the completest proof of it. Ithought it must be so. I thought I could not be so deceived; but now, itis clear; the state of his mind is as clear and decided, as my wishes onthe subject have been ever since I knew you. Yes, Harriet, just so longhave I been wanting the very circumstance to happen that has happened.I could never tell whether an attachment between you and Mr. Elton weremost desirable or most natural. Its probability and its eligibility havereally so equalled each other! I am very happy. I congratulate you, mydear Harriet, with all my heart. This is an attachment which a woman maywell feel pride in creating. This is a connexion which offers nothingbut good. It will give you every thing that you want--consideration,independence, a proper home--it will fix you in the centre of all yourreal friends, close to Hartfield and to me, and confirm our intimacyfor ever. This, Harriet, is an alliance which can never raise a blush ineither of us]
 ["Dear Miss Woodhouse!"--and "Dear Miss Woodhouse," was all that Harriet,with many tender embraces could articulate at first; but when they didarrive at something more like conversation, it was sufficiently clear toher friend that she saw, felt, anticipated, and remembered just as sheought. Mr. Elton's superiority had very ample acknowledgment]
 [Whatever you say is always right," cried Harriet, "and therefore Isuppose, and believe, and hope it must be so; but otherwise I could nothave imagined it. It is so much beyond any thing I deserve. Mr. Elton,who might marry any body! There cannot be two opinions about _him_. Heis so very superior. Only think of those sweet verses--'To Miss ------]
 [Dear me, how clever!--Could it really be meant for me?""I cannot make a question, or listen to a question about that. It is acertainty. Receive it on my judgment. It is a sort of prologue tothe play, a motto to the chapter; and will be soon followed bymatter-of-fact prose]
 ["It is a sort of thing which nobody could have expected. I am sure,a month ago, I had no more idea myself!--The strangest things do takeplace!""When Miss Smiths and Mr. Eltons get acquainted--they do indeed--andreally it is strange; it is out of the common course that what is soevidently, so palpably desirable--what courts the pre-arrangement ofother people, should so immediately shape itself into the proper form.You and Mr. Elton are by situation called together; you belong to oneanother by every circumstance of your respective homes. Your marryingwill be equal to the match at Randalls. There does seem to be asomething in the air of Hartfield which gives love exactly the rightdirection, and sends it into the very channel where it ought to flow]
 [    The course of true love never did run smooth--A Hartfield edition of Shakespeare would have a long note on thatpassage]
 ["That Mr. Elton should really be in love with me,--me, of all people,who did not know him, to speak to him, at Michaelmas! And he, the veryhandsomest man that ever was, and a man that every body looks up to,quite like Mr. Knightley! His company so sought after, that every bodysays he need not eat a single meal by himself if he does not chuse it;that he has more invitations than there are days in the week. And soexcellent in the Church! Miss Nash has put down all the texts he hasever preached from since he came to Highbury. Dear me! When I look backto the first time I saw him! How little did I think!--The two Abbots andI ran into the front room and peeped through the blind when we heard hewas going by, and Miss Nash came and scolded us away, and staid to lookthrough herself; however, she called me back presently, and let melook too, which was very good-natured. And how beautiful we thought helooked! He was arm-in-arm with Mr. Cole]
 ["This is an alliance which, whoever--whatever your friends may be, mustbe agreeable to them, provided at least they have common sense; and weare not to be addressing our conduct to fools. If they are anxious tosee you _happily_ married, here is a man whose amiable character givesevery assurance of it;--if they wish to have you settled in the samecountry and circle which they have chosen to place you in, here it willbe accomplished; and if their only object is that you should, in thecommon phrase, be _well_ married, here is the comfortable fortune, therespectable establishment, the rise in the world which must satisfythem]
 ["Yes, very true. How nicely you talk; I love to hear you. You understandevery thing. You and Mr. Elton are one as clever as the other. Thischarade!--If I had studied a twelvemonth, I could never have made anything like it]
 ["I thought he meant to try his skill, by his manner of declining ityesterday]
 ["I do think it is, without exception, the best charade I ever read]
 ["I never read one more to the purpose, certainly]
 ["It is as long again as almost all we have had before]
 ["I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour. Such thingsin general cannot be too short]
 [Harriet was too intent on the lines to hear. The most satisfactorycomparisons were rising in her mind]
 [It is one thing," said she, presently--her cheeks in a glow--"to havevery good sense in a common way, like every body else, and if there isany thing to say, to sit down and write a letter, and say just what youmust, in a short way; and another, to write verses and charades likethis]
 [Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr. Martin'sprose]
 [Such sweet lines!" continued Harriet--"these two last!--But how shall Iever be able to return the paper, or say I have found it out?--Oh! MissWoodhouse, what can we do about that?""Leave it to me. You do nothing. He will be here this evening, I daresay, and then I will give it him back, and some nonsense or other willpass between us, and you shall not be committed.--Your soft eyes shallchuse their own time for beaming. Trust to me]
 ["Oh! Miss Woodhouse, what a pity that I must not write this beautifulcharade into my book! I am sure I have not got one half so good]
 ["Leave out the two last lines, and there is no reason why you should notwrite it into your book]
 ["Oh! but those two lines are"----"The best of all. Granted;--for private enjoyment; and for privateenjoyment keep them. They are not at all the less written you know,because you divide them. The couplet does not cease to be, nor does itsmeaning change. But take it away, and all _appropriation_ ceases, and avery pretty gallant charade remains, fit for any collection. Depend uponit, he would not like to have his charade slighted, much better than hispassion. A poet in love must be encouraged in both capacities, orneither. Give me the book, I will write it down, and then there can beno possible reflection on you]
 [Harriet submitted, though her mind could hardly separate the parts,so as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing down adeclaration of love. It seemed too precious an offering for any degreeof publicity]
 [I shall never let that book go out of my own hands," said she]
 [Very well," replied Emma; "a most natural feeling; and the longer itlasts, the better I shall be pleased. But here is my father coming: youwill not object to my reading the charade to him. It will be giving himso much pleasure! He loves any thing of the sort, and especially anything that pays woman a compliment. He has the tenderest spirit ofgallantry towards us all!--You must let me read it to him]
 [Harriet looked grave]
 [My dear Harriet, you must not refine too much upon this charade.--Youwill betray your feelings improperly, if you are too conscious and tooquick, and appear to affix more meaning, or even quite all the meaningwhich may be affixed to it. Do not be overpowered by such a littletribute of admiration. If he had been anxious for secrecy, he would nothave left the paper while I was by; but he rather pushed it towards methan towards you. Do not let us be too solemn on the business. He hasencouragement enough to proceed, without our sighing out our souls overthis charade]
 ["Oh! no--I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it. Do as you please]
 [Mr. Woodhouse came in, and very soon led to the subject again, by therecurrence of his very frequent inquiry of "Well, my dears, how doesyour book go on?--Have you got any thing fresh?""Yes, papa; we have something to read you, something quite fresh. Apiece of paper was found on the table this morning--(dropt, we suppose,by a fairy)--containing a very pretty charade, and we have just copiedit in]
 [She read it to him, just as he liked to have any thing read, slowly anddistinctly, and two or three times over, with explanations of everypart as she proceeded--and he was very much pleased, and, as she hadforeseen, especially struck with the complimentary conclusion]
 [Aye, that's very just, indeed, that's very properly said. Very true]
 [Woman, lovely woman]
 [ It is such a pretty charade, my dear, that Ican easily guess what fairy brought it.--Nobody could have written soprettily, but you, Emma]
 [Emma only nodded, and smiled.--After a little thinking, and a verytender sigh, he added,"Ah! it is no difficulty to see who you take after! Your dear motherwas so clever at all those things! If I had but her memory! But I canremember nothing;--not even that particular riddle which you haveheard me mention; I can only recollect the first stanza; and there areseveral]
 [  Kitty, a fair but frozen maid,      Kindled a flame I yet deplore,    The hood-wink'd boy I called to aid,    Though of his near approach afraid,      So fatal to my suit before.And that is all that I can recollect of it--but it is very clever allthe way through. But I think, my dear, you said you had got it]
 ["Yes, papa, it is written out in our second page. We copied it from theElegant Extracts. It was Garrick's, you know]
 ["Aye, very true.--I wish I could recollect more of it]
 [  Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.The name makes me think of poor Isabella; for she was very near beingchristened Catherine after her grandmama. I hope we shall have her herenext week. Have you thought, my dear, where you shall put her--and whatroom there will be for the children?""Oh! yes--she will have her own room, of course; the room she alwayshas;--and there is the nursery for the children,--just as usual, youknow. Why should there be any change?""I do not know, my dear--but it is so long since she was here!--notsince last Easter, and then only for a few days.--Mr. John Knightley'sbeing a lawyer is very inconvenient.--Poor Isabella!--she is sadly takenaway from us all!--and how sorry she will be when she comes, not to seeMiss Taylor here!""She will not be surprized, papa, at least]
 ["I do not know, my dear. I am sure I was very much surprized when Ifirst heard she was going to be married]
 ["We must ask Mr. and Mrs. Weston to dine with us, while Isabella ishere]
 ["Yes, my dear, if there is time.--But--(in a very depressed tone)--sheis coming for only one week. There will not be time for any thing]
 ["It is unfortunate that they cannot stay longer--but it seems a case ofnecessity. Mr. John Knightley must be in town again on the 28th, and weought to be thankful, papa, that we are to have the whole of the timethey can give to the country, that two or three days are not to be takenout for the Abbey. Mr. Knightley promises to give up his claim thisChristmas--though you know it is longer since they were with him, thanwith us]
 ["It would be very hard, indeed, my dear, if poor Isabella were to beanywhere but at Hartfield]
 [Mr. Woodhouse could never allow for Mr. Knightley's claims on hisbrother, or any body's claims on Isabella, except his own. He sat musinga little while, and then said,"But I do not see why poor Isabella should be obliged to go back sosoon, though he does. I think, Emma, I shall try and persuade her tostay longer with us. She and the children might stay very well]
 ["Ah! papa--that is what you never have been able to accomplish, and Ido not think you ever will. Isabella cannot bear to stay behind herhusband]
 [This was too true for contradiction. Unwelcome as it was, Mr. Woodhousecould only give a submissive sigh; and as Emma saw his spirits affectedby the idea of his daughter's attachment to her husband, she immediatelyled to such a branch of the subject as must raise them]
 [Harriet must give us as much of her company as she can while my brotherand sister are here. I am sure she will be pleased with the children.We are very proud of the children, are not we, papa? I wonder which shewill think the handsomest, Henry or John?""Aye, I wonder which she will. Poor little dears, how glad they will beto come. They are very fond of being at Hartfield, Harriet]
 ["I dare say they are, sir. I am sure I do not know who is not]
 ["Henry is a fine boy, but John is very like his mama. Henry is theeldest, he was named after me, not after his father. John, the second,is named after his father. Some people are surprized, I believe, thatthe eldest was not, but Isabella would have him called Henry, which Ithought very pretty of her. And he is a very clever boy, indeed. Theyare all remarkably clever; and they have so many pretty ways. They willcome and stand by my chair, and say, 'Grandpapa, can you give me a bitof string?' and once Henry asked me for a knife, but I told him kniveswere only made for grandpapas. I think their father is too rough withthem very often]
 ["He appears rough to you," said Emma, "because you are so very gentleyourself; but if you could compare him with other papas, you would notthink him rough. He wishes his boys to be active and hardy; and ifthey misbehave, can give them a sharp word now and then; but he is anaffectionate father--certainly Mr. John Knightley is an affectionatefather. The children are all fond of him]
 ["And then their uncle comes in, and tosses them up to the ceiling in avery frightful way!""But they like it, papa; there is nothing they like so much. It is suchenjoyment to them, that if their uncle did not lay down the rule oftheir taking turns, whichever began would never give way to the other]
 ["Well, I cannot understand it]
 ["That is the case with us all, papa. One half of the world cannotunderstand the pleasures of the other]
 [Later in the morning, and just as the girls were going to separatein preparation for the regular four o'clock dinner, the hero of thisinimitable charade walked in again. Harriet turned away; but Emma couldreceive him with the usual smile, and her quick eye soon discerned inhis the consciousness of having made a push--of having thrown a die;and she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up. His ostensiblereason, however, was to ask whether Mr. Woodhouse's party could be madeup in the evening without him, or whether he should be in the smallestdegree necessary at Hartfield. If he were, every thing else must giveway; but otherwise his friend Cole had been saying so much about hisdining with him--had made such a point of it, that he had promised himconditionally to come.Emma thanked him, but could not allow of his disappointing his friendon their account; her father was sure of his rubber. He re-urged--shere-declined; and he seemed then about to make his bow, when taking thepaper from the table, she returned it--"Oh! here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with us; thankyou for the sight of it. We admired it so much, that I have venturedto write it into Miss Smith's collection. Your friend will not take itamiss I hope. Of course I have not transcribed beyond the first eightlines]
 [Mr. Elton certainly did not very well know what to say. He looked ratherdoubtingly--rather confused; said something about "honour,"--glanced atEmma and at Harriet, and then seeing the book open on the table, tookit up, and examined it very attentively. With the view of passing off anawkward moment, Emma smilingly said,"You must make my apologies to your friend; but so good a charademust not be confined to one or two. He may be sure of every woman'sapprobation while he writes with such gallantry]
 ["I have no hesitation in saying," replied Mr. Elton, though hesitatinga good deal while he spoke; "I have no hesitation in saying--at leastif my friend feels at all as _I_ do--I have not the smallest doubt that,could he see his little effusion honoured as _I_ see it, (looking at thebook again, and replacing it on the table), he would consider it as theproudest moment of his life]
 [After this speech he was gone as soon as possible. Emma could not thinkit too soon; for with all his good and agreeable qualities, there wasa sort of parade in his speeches which was very apt to incline her tolaugh. She ran away to indulge the inclination, leaving the tender andthe sublime of pleasure to Harriet's share.CHAPTER XThough now the middle of December, there had yet been no weather toprevent the young ladies from tolerably regular exercise; and on themorrow, Emma had a charitable visit to pay to a poor sick family, wholived a little way out of Highbury.Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage Lane, a laneleading at right angles from the broad, though irregular, main street ofthe place; and, as may be inferred, containing the blessed abode of Mr.Elton. A few inferior dwellings were first to be passed, and then, abouta quarter of a mile down the lane rose the Vicarage, an old and notvery good house, almost as close to the road as it could be. It hadno advantage of situation; but had been very much smartened up by thepresent proprietor; and, such as it was, there could be no possibilityof the two friends passing it without a slackened pace and observingeyes.--Emma's remark was--"There it is. There go you and your riddle-book one of thesedays]
 [--Harriet's was--"Oh, what a sweet house!--How very beautiful!--There are the yellowcurtains that Miss Nash admires so much]
 ["I do not often walk this way _now_," said Emma, as they proceeded, "but_then_ there will be an inducement, and I shall gradually get intimatelyacquainted with all the hedges, gates, pools and pollards of this partof Highbury]
 [Harriet, she found, had never in her life been inside the Vicarage,and her curiosity to see it was so extreme, that, considering exteriorsand probabilities, Emma could only class it, as a proof of love, withMr. Elton's seeing ready wit in her]
 [I wish we could contrive it," said she; "but I cannot think of anytolerable pretence for going in;--no servant that I want to inquireabout of his housekeeper--no message from my father]
 [She pondered, but could think of nothing. After a mutual silence of someminutes, Harriet thus began again--"I do so wonder, Miss Woodhouse, that you should not be married, orgoing to be married! so charming as you are!"--Emma laughed, and replied,"My being charming, Harriet, is not quite enough to induce me to marry;I must find other people charming--one other person at least. And Iam not only, not going to be married, at present, but have very littleintention of ever marrying at all]
 ["Ah!--so you say; but I cannot believe it]
 ["I must see somebody very superior to any one I have seen yet, to betempted; Mr. Elton, you know, (recollecting herself,) is out of thequestion: and I do _not_ wish to see any such person. I would rather notbe tempted. I cannot really change for the better. If I were to marry, Imust expect to repent it]
 ["Dear me!--it is so odd to hear a woman talk so!"--"I have none of the usual inducements of women to marry. Were I to fallin love, indeed, it would be a different thing! but I never have been inlove; it is not my way, or my nature; and I do not think I ever shall.And, without love, I am sure I should be a fool to change such asituation as mine. Fortune I do not want; employment I do not want;consequence I do not want: I believe few married women are half as muchmistress of their husband's house as I am of Hartfield; and never, nevercould I expect to be so truly beloved and important; so always first andalways right in any man's eyes as I am in my father's]
 ["But then, to be an old maid at last, like Miss Bates!""That is as formidable an image as you could present, Harriet; and ifI thought I should ever be like Miss Bates! so silly--so satisfied--sosmiling--so prosing--so undistinguishing and unfastidious--and so aptto tell every thing relative to every body about me, I would marryto-morrow. But between _us_, I am convinced there never can be anylikeness, except in being unmarried]
 ["But still, you will be an old maid! and that's so dreadful!""Never mind, Harriet, I shall not be a poor old maid; and it is povertyonly which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous public! A singlewoman, with a very narrow income, must be a ridiculous, disagreeable oldmaid! the proper sport of boys and girls, but a single woman, of goodfortune, is always respectable, and may be as sensible and pleasantas any body else. And the distinction is not quite so much against thecandour and common sense of the world as appears at first; for a verynarrow income has a tendency to contract the mind, and sour the temper.Those who can barely live, and who live perforce in a very small, andgenerally very inferior, society, may well be illiberal and cross. Thisdoes not apply, however, to Miss Bates; she is only too good natured andtoo silly to suit me; but, in general, she is very much to the tasteof every body, though single and though poor. Poverty certainly has notcontracted her mind: I really believe, if she had only a shilling in theworld, she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it; and nobodyis afraid of her: that is a great charm]
 ["Dear me! but what shall you do? how shall you employ yourself when yougrow old?""If I know myself, Harriet, mine is an active, busy mind, with a greatmany independent resources; and I do not perceive why I should be morein want of employment at forty or fifty than one-and-twenty. Woman'susual occupations of hand and mind will be as open to me then as theyare now; or with no important variation. If I draw less, I shall readmore; if I give up music, I shall take to carpet-work. And as forobjects of interest, objects for the affections, which is in truth thegreat point of inferiority, the want of which is really the great evilto be avoided in _not_ marrying, I shall be very well off, with all thechildren of a sister I love so much, to care about. There will be enoughof them, in all probability, to supply every sort of sensation thatdeclining life can need. There will be enough for every hope and everyfear; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a parent, itsuits my ideas of comfort better than what is warmer and blinder. Mynephews and nieces!--I shall often have a niece with me]
 ["Do you know Miss Bates's niece? That is, I know you must have seen hera hundred times--but are you acquainted?""Oh! yes; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes toHighbury. By the bye, _that_ is almost enough to put one out of conceitwith a niece. Heaven forbid! at least, that I should ever bore peoplehalf so much about all the Knightleys together, as she does about JaneFairfax. One is sick of the very name of Jane Fairfax. Every letter fromher is read forty times over; her compliments to all friends go roundand round again; and if she does but send her aunt the pattern of astomacher, or knit a pair of garters for her grandmother, one hears ofnothing else for a month. I wish Jane Fairfax very well; but she tiresme to death]
 [They were now approaching the cottage, and all idle topics weresuperseded. Emma was very compassionate; and the distresses of the poorwere as sure of relief from her personal attention and kindness, hercounsel and her patience, as from her purse. She understood their ways,could allow for their ignorance and their temptations, had no romanticexpectations of extraordinary virtue from those for whom education haddone so little; entered into their troubles with ready sympathy, andalways gave her assistance with as much intelligence as good-will. Inthe present instance, it was sickness and poverty together which shecame to visit; and after remaining there as long as she could givecomfort or advice, she quitted the cottage with such an impression ofthe scene as made her say to Harriet, as they walked away,"These are the sights, Harriet, to do one good. How trifling they makeevery thing else appear!--I feel now as if I could think of nothing butthese poor creatures all the rest of the day; and yet, who can say howsoon it may all vanish from my mind?""Very true," said Harriet. "Poor creatures! one can think of nothingelse]
 ["And really, I do not think the impression will soon be over," saidEmma, as she crossed the low hedge, and tottering footstep which endedthe narrow, slippery path through the cottage garden, and brought theminto the lane again. "I do not think it will," stopping to look oncemore at all the outward wretchedness of the place, and recall the stillgreater within]
 [Oh! dear, no," said her companion.They walked on. The lane made a slight bend; and when that bend waspassed, Mr. Elton was immediately in sight; and so near as to give Emmatime only to say farther,"Ah! Harriet, here comes a very sudden trial of our stability in goodthoughts. Well, (smiling,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassionhas produced exertion and relief to the sufferers, it has done all thatis truly important. If we feel for the wretched, enough to do all we canfor them, the rest is empty sympathy, only distressing to ourselves]
 [Harriet could just answer, "Oh! dear, yes," before the gentleman joinedthem. The wants and sufferings of the poor family, however, were thefirst subject on meeting. He had been going to call on them. His visithe would now defer; but they had a very interesting parley aboutwhat could be done and should be done. Mr. Elton then turned back toaccompany them]
 [To fall in with each other on such an errand as this," thought Emma;"to meet in a charitable scheme; this will bring a great increaseof love on each side. I should not wonder if it were to bring on thedeclaration. It must, if I were not here. I wish I were anywhere else]
 [Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could, she soonafterwards took possession of a narrow footpath, a little raised on oneside of the lane, leaving them together in the main road. But she hadnot been there two minutes when she found that Harriet's habits ofdependence and imitation were bringing her up too, and that, in short,they would both be soon after her. This would not do; she immediatelystopped, under pretence of having some alteration to make in the lacingof her half-boot, and stooping down in complete occupation of thefootpath, begged them to have the goodness to walk on, and she wouldfollow in half a minute. They did as they were desired; and by the timeshe judged it reasonable to have done with her boot, she had the comfortof farther delay in her power, being overtaken by a child from thecottage, setting out, according to orders, with her pitcher, to fetchbroth from Hartfield. To walk by the side of this child, and talk toand question her, was the most natural thing in the world, or would havebeen the most natural, had she been acting just then without design;and by this means the others were still able to keep ahead, withoutany obligation of waiting for her. She gained on them, however,involuntarily: the child's pace was quick, and theirs rather slow;and she was the more concerned at it, from their being evidently ina conversation which interested them. Mr. Elton was speaking withanimation, Harriet listening with a very pleased attention; and Emma,having sent the child on, was beginning to think how she might draw backa little more, when they both looked around, and she was obliged to jointhem.Mr. Elton was still talking, still engaged in some interesting detail;and Emma experienced some disappointment when she found that he was onlygiving his fair companion an account of the yesterday's party at hisfriend Cole's, and that she was come in herself for the Stilton cheese,the north Wiltshire, the butter, the celery, the beet-root, and all thedessert]
 [This would soon have led to something better, of course," was herconsoling reflection; "any thing interests between those who love; andany thing will serve as introduction to what is near the heart. If Icould but have kept longer away!"They now walked on together quietly, till within view of the vicaragepales, when a sudden resolution, of at least getting Harriet into thehouse, made her again find something very much amiss about her boot, andfall behind to arrange it once more. She then broke the lace off short,and dexterously throwing it into a ditch, was presently obliged toentreat them to stop, and acknowledged her inability to put herself torights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort]
 [Part of my lace is gone," said she, "and I do not know how I am tocontrive. I really am a most troublesome companion to you both, but Ihope I am not often so ill-equipped. Mr. Elton, I must beg leave to stopat your house, and ask your housekeeper for a bit of ribband or string,or any thing just to keep my boot on]
 [Mr. Elton looked all happiness at this proposition; and nothing couldexceed his alertness and attention in conducting them into his house andendeavouring to make every thing appear to advantage. The room they weretaken into was the one he chiefly occupied, and looking forwards; behindit was another with which it immediately communicated; the door betweenthem was open, and Emma passed into it with the housekeeper to receiveher assistance in the most comfortable manner. She was obliged to leavethe door ajar as she found it; but she fully intended that Mr. Eltonshould close it. It was not closed, however, it still remained ajar; butby engaging the housekeeper in incessant conversation, she hoped to makeit practicable for him to chuse his own subject in the adjoiningroom. For ten minutes she could hear nothing but herself. It could beprotracted no longer. She was then obliged to be finished, and make herappearance.The lovers were standing together at one of the windows. It had a mostfavourable aspect; and, for half a minute, Emma felt the glory of havingschemed successfully. But it would not do; he had not come to the point.He had been most agreeable, most delightful; he had told Harriet thathe had seen them go by, and had purposely followed them; other littlegallantries and allusions had been dropt, but nothing serious]
 [Cautious, very cautious," thought Emma; "he advances inch by inch, andwill hazard nothing till he believes himself secure]
 [Still, however, though every thing had not been accomplished by heringenious device, she could not but flatter herself that it had beenthe occasion of much present enjoyment to both, and must be leading themforward to the great event.CHAPTER XIMr. Elton must now be left to himself. It was no longer in Emma's powerto superintend his happiness or quicken his measures. The coming of hersister's family was so very near at hand, that first in anticipation,and then in reality, it became henceforth her prime object of interest;and during the ten days of their stay at Hartfield it was not to beexpected--she did not herself expect--that any thing beyond occasional,fortuitous assistance could be afforded by her to the lovers. They mightadvance rapidly if they would, however; they must advance somehow orother whether they would or no. She hardly wished to have more leisurefor them. There are people, who the more you do for them, the less theywill do for themselves.Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley, from having been longer than usual absentfrom Surry, were exciting of course rather more than the usual interest.Till this year, every long vacation since their marriage had beendivided between Hartfield and Donwell Abbey; but all the holidays ofthis autumn had been given to sea-bathing for the children, and it wastherefore many months since they had been seen in a regular way by theirSurry connexions, or seen at all by Mr. Woodhouse, who could not beinduced to get so far as London, even for poor Isabella's sake; andwho consequently was now most nervously and apprehensively happy inforestalling this too short visit.He thought much of the evils of the journey for her, and not a littleof the fatigues of his own horses and coachman who were to bring someof the party the last half of the way; but his alarms were needless;the sixteen miles being happily accomplished, and Mr. and Mrs. JohnKnightley, their five children, and a competent number of nursery-maids,all reaching Hartfield in safety. The bustle and joy of such an arrival,the many to be talked to, welcomed, encouraged, and variously dispersedand disposed of, produced a noise and confusion which his nerves couldnot have borne under any other cause, nor have endured much longer evenfor this; but the ways of Hartfield and the feelings of her fatherwere so respected by Mrs. John Knightley, that in spite of maternalsolicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her little ones, and for theirhaving instantly all the liberty and attendance, all the eating anddrinking, and sleeping and playing, which they could possibly wish for,without the smallest delay, the children were never allowed to be longa disturbance to him, either in themselves or in any restless attendanceon them.Mrs. John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little woman, of gentle, quietmanners, and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate; wraptup in her family; a devoted wife, a doating mother, and so tenderlyattached to her father and sister that, but for these higher ties, awarmer love might have seemed impossible. She could never see a faultin any of them. She was not a woman of strong understanding or anyquickness; and with this resemblance of her father, she inherited alsomuch of his constitution; was delicate in her own health, over-carefulof that of her children, had many fears and many nerves, and was as fondof her own Mr. Wingfield in town as her father could be of Mr. Perry.They were alike too, in a general benevolence of temper, and a stronghabit of regard for every old acquaintance.Mr. John Knightley was a tall, gentleman-like, and very clever man;rising in his profession, domestic, and respectable in his privatecharacter; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generallypleasing; and capable of being sometimes out of humour. He was not anill-tempered man, not so often unreasonably cross as to deserve such areproach; but his temper was not his great perfection; and, indeed, withsuch a worshipping wife, it was hardly possible that any natural defectsin it should not be increased. The extreme sweetness of her tempermust hurt his. He had all the clearness and quickness of mind which shewanted, and he could sometimes act an ungracious, or say a severe thing.He was not a great favourite with his fair sister-in-law. Nothing wrongin him escaped her. She was quick in feeling the little injuries toIsabella, which Isabella never felt herself. Perhaps she might havepassed over more had his manners been flattering to Isabella's sister,but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and friend, withoutpraise and without blindness; but hardly any degree of personalcompliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault ofall in her eyes which he sometimes fell into, the want of respectfulforbearance towards her father. There he had not always the patiencethat could have been wished. Mr. Woodhouse's peculiarities andfidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational remonstrance orsharp retort equally ill-bestowed. It did not often happen; for Mr. JohnKnightley had really a great regard for his father-in-law, and generallya strong sense of what was due to him; but it was too often for Emma'scharity, especially as there was all the pain of apprehension frequentlyto be endured, though the offence came not. The beginning, however, ofevery visit displayed none but the properest feelings, and this being ofnecessity so short might be hoped to pass away in unsullied cordiality.They had not been long seated and composed when Mr. Woodhouse, with amelancholy shake of the head and a sigh, called his daughter's attentionto the sad change at Hartfield since she had been there last]
 [Ah, my dear," said he, "poor Miss Taylor--It is a grievous business]
 ["Oh yes, sir," cried she with ready sympathy, "how you must miss her!And dear Emma, too!--What a dreadful loss to you both!--I have been sogrieved for you.--I could not imagine how you could possibly do withouther.--It is a sad change indeed.--But I hope she is pretty well, sir]
 ["Pretty well, my dear--I hope--pretty well.--I do not know but that theplace agrees with her tolerably]
 [Mr. John Knightley here asked Emma quietly whether there were any doubtsof the air of Randalls]
 [Oh! no--none in the least. I never saw Mrs. Weston better in mylife--never looking so well. Papa is only speaking his own regret]
 ["Very much to the honour of both," was the handsome reply]
 [And do you see her, sir, tolerably often?" asked Isabella in theplaintive tone which just suited her father.Mr. Woodhouse hesitated.--"Not near so often, my dear, as I could wish]
 ["Oh! papa, we have missed seeing them but one entire day since theymarried. Either in the morning or evening of every day, excepting one,have we seen either Mr. Weston or Mrs. Weston, and generally both,either at Randalls or here--and as you may suppose, Isabella, mostfrequently here. They are very, very kind in their visits. Mr. Westonis really as kind as herself. Papa, if you speak in that melancholy way,you will be giving Isabella a false idea of us all. Every body must beaware that Miss Taylor must be missed, but every body ought also to beassured that Mr. and Mrs. Weston do really prevent our missing her byany means to the extent we ourselves anticipated--which is the exacttruth]
 ["Just as it should be," said Mr. John Knightley, "and just as I hopedit was from your letters. Her wish of shewing you attention could not bedoubted, and his being a disengaged and social man makes it all easy. Ihave been always telling you, my love, that I had no idea of the changebeing so very material to Hartfield as you apprehended; and now you haveEmma's account, I hope you will be satisfied]
 ["Why, to be sure," said Mr. Woodhouse--"yes, certainly--I cannotdeny that Mrs. Weston, poor Mrs. Weston, does come and see us prettyoften--but then--she is always obliged to go away again]
 ["It would be very hard upon Mr. Weston if she did not, papa.--You quiteforget poor Mr. Weston]
 ["I think, indeed," said John Knightley pleasantly, "that Mr. Weston hassome little claim. You and I, Emma, will venture to take the part of thepoor husband. I, being a husband, and you not being a wife, the claimsof the man may very likely strike us with equal force. As for Isabella,she has been married long enough to see the convenience of putting allthe Mr. Westons aside as much as she can]
 ["Me, my love," cried his wife, hearing and understanding only in part.--"Are you talking about me?--I am sure nobody ought to be, or can be, agreater advocate for matrimony than I am; and if it had not been forthe misery of her leaving Hartfield, I should never have thought of MissTaylor but as the most fortunate woman in the world; and as to slightingMr. Weston, that excellent Mr. Weston, I think there is nothing he doesnot deserve. I believe he is one of the very best-tempered men that everexisted. Excepting yourself and your brother, I do not know his equalfor temper. I shall never forget his flying Henry's kite for him thatvery windy day last Easter--and ever since his particular kindness lastSeptember twelvemonth in writing that note, at twelve o'clock at night,on purpose to assure me that there was no scarlet fever at Cobham, Ihave been convinced there could not be a more feeling heart nor a betterman in existence.--If any body can deserve him, it must be Miss Taylor]
 ["Where is the young man?" said John Knightley. "Has he been here on thisoccasion--or has he not?""He has not been here yet," replied Emma. "There was a strongexpectation of his coming soon after the marriage, but it ended innothing; and I have not heard him mentioned lately]
 ["But you should tell them of the letter, my dear," said her father]
 [He wrote a letter to poor Mrs. Weston, to congratulate her, and a veryproper, handsome letter it was. She shewed it to me. I thought it verywell done of him indeed. Whether it was his own idea you know, onecannot tell. He is but young, and his uncle, perhaps--""My dear papa, he is three-and-twenty. You forget how time passes]
 ["Three-and-twenty!--is he indeed?--Well, I could not have thoughtit--and he was but two years old when he lost his poor mother! Well,time does fly indeed!--and my memory is very bad. However, it was anexceeding good, pretty letter, and gave Mr. and Mrs. Weston a great dealof pleasure. I remember it was written from Weymouth, and dated Sept.28th--and began, 'My dear Madam,' but I forget how it went on; and itwas signed 'F. C. Weston Churchill]
 [--I remember that perfectly]
 ["How very pleasing and proper of him!" cried the good-hearted Mrs. JohnKnightley. "I have no doubt of his being a most amiable young man. Buthow sad it is that he should not live at home with his father! There issomething so shocking in a child's being taken away from his parents andnatural home! I never could comprehend how Mr. Weston could part withhim. To give up one's child! I really never could think well of any bodywho proposed such a thing to any body else]
 ["Nobody ever did think well of the Churchills, I fancy," observed Mr.John Knightley coolly. "But you need not imagine Mr. Weston to have feltwhat you would feel in giving up Henry or John. Mr. Weston is ratheran easy, cheerful-tempered man, than a man of strong feelings; he takesthings as he finds them, and makes enjoyment of them somehow or other,depending, I suspect, much more upon what is called society for hiscomforts, that is, upon the power of eating and drinking, and playingwhist with his neighbours five times a week, than upon family affection,or any thing that home affords]
 [Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on Mr. Weston, and hadhalf a mind to take it up; but she struggled, and let it pass. Shewould keep the peace if possible; and there was something honourable andvaluable in the strong domestic habits, the all-sufficiency of home tohimself, whence resulted her brother's disposition to look down onthe common rate of social intercourse, and those to whom it wasimportant.--It had a high claim to forbearance.CHAPTER XIIMr. Knightley was to dine with them--rather against the inclination ofMr. Woodhouse, who did not like that any one should share with him inIsabella's first day. Emma's sense of right however had decided it;and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother, she hadparticular pleasure, from the circumstance of the late disagreementbetween Mr. Knightley and herself, in procuring him the properinvitation.She hoped they might now become friends again. She thought it was timeto make up. Making-up indeed would not do. _She_ certainly had not beenin the wrong, and _he_ would never own that he had. Concession must beout of the question; but it was time to appear to forget that they hadever quarrelled; and she hoped it might rather assist the restoration offriendship, that when he came into the room she had one of the childrenwith her--the youngest, a nice little girl about eight months old, whowas now making her first visit to Hartfield, and very happy to be dancedabout in her aunt's arms. It did assist; for though he began with gravelooks and short questions, he was soon led on to talk of them all inthe usual way, and to take the child out of her arms with all theunceremoniousness of perfect amity. Emma felt they were friends again;and the conviction giving her at first great satisfaction, and thena little sauciness, she could not help saying, as he was admiring thebaby,"What a comfort it is, that we think alike about our nephews and nieces.As to men and women, our opinions are sometimes very different; but withregard to these children, I observe we never disagree]
 ["If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men and women,and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealings withthem, as you are where these children are concerned, we might alwaysthink alike]
 ["To be sure--our discordancies must always arise from my being in thewrong]
 ["Yes," said he, smiling--"and reason good. I was sixteen years old whenyou were born]
 ["A material difference then," she replied--"and no doubt you were muchmy superior in judgment at that period of our lives; but does not thelapse of one-and-twenty years bring our understandings a good dealnearer?""Yes--a good deal _nearer_]
 ["But still, not near enough to give me a chance of being right, if wethink differently]
 ["I have still the advantage of you by sixteen years' experience, and bynot being a pretty young woman and a spoiled child. Come, my dear Emma,let us be friends, and say no more about it. Tell your aunt, littleEmma, that she ought to set you a better example than to be renewing oldgrievances, and that if she were not wrong before, she is now]
 ["That's true," she cried--"very true. Little Emma, grow up a betterwoman than your aunt. Be infinitely cleverer and not half so conceited.Now, Mr. Knightley, a word or two more, and I have done. As far as goodintentions went, we were _both_ right, and I must say that no effects onmy side of the argument have yet proved wrong. I only want to know thatMr. Martin is not very, very bitterly disappointed]
 ["A man cannot be more so," was his short, full answer]
 [Ah!--Indeed I am very sorry.--Come, shake hands with me]
 [This had just taken place and with great cordiality, when John Knightleymade his appearance, and "How d'ye do, George?" and "John, how areyou?" succeeded in the true English style, burying under a calmness thatseemed all but indifference, the real attachment which would have ledeither of them, if requisite, to do every thing for the good of theother.The evening was quiet and conversable, as Mr. Woodhouse declined cardsentirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella, andthe little party made two natural divisions; on one side he and hisdaughter; on the other the two Mr. Knightleys; their subjects totallydistinct, or very rarely mixing--and Emma only occasionally joining inone or the other.The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits, but principallyof those of the elder, whose temper was by much the most communicative,and who was always the greater talker. As a magistrate, he had generallysome point of law to consult John about, or, at least, some curiousanecdote to give; and as a farmer, as keeping in hand the home-farm atDonwell, he had to tell what every field was to bear next year, and togive all such local information as could not fail of being interestingto a brother whose home it had equally been the longest part of hislife, and whose attachments were strong. The plan of a drain, the changeof a fence, the felling of a tree, and the destination of every acre forwheat, turnips, or spring corn, was entered into with as much equalityof interest by John, as his cooler manners rendered possible; and if hiswilling brother ever left him any thing to inquire about, his inquirieseven approached a tone of eagerness.While they were thus comfortably occupied, Mr. Woodhouse was enjoying afull flow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter]
 [My poor dear Isabella," said he, fondly taking her hand, andinterrupting, for a few moments, her busy labours for some one of herfive children--"How long it is, how terribly long since you were here!And how tired you must be after your journey! You must go to bed early,my dear--and I recommend a little gruel to you before you go.--You andI will have a nice basin of gruel together. My dear Emma, suppose we allhave a little gruel]
 [Emma could not suppose any such thing, knowing as she did, that both theMr. Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as herself;--andtwo basins only were ordered. After a little more discourse in praise ofgruel, with some wondering at its not being taken every evening by everybody, he proceeded to say, with an air of grave reflection,"It was an awkward business, my dear, your spending the autumn at SouthEnd instead of coming here. I never had much opinion of the sea air]
 ["Mr. Wingfield most strenuously recommended it, sir--or we should nothave gone. He recommended it for all the children, but particularly forthe weakness in little Bella's throat,--both sea air and bathing]
 ["Ah! my dear, but Perry had many doubts about the sea doing her anygood; and as to myself, I have been long perfectly convinced, thoughperhaps I never told you so before, that the sea is very rarely of useto any body. I am sure it almost killed me once]
 ["Come, come," cried Emma, feeling this to be an unsafe subject, "I mustbeg you not to talk of the sea. It makes me envious and miserable;--Iwho have never seen it! South End is prohibited, if you please. My dearIsabella, I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr. Perry yet; andhe never forgets you]
 ["Oh! good Mr. Perry--how is he, sir?""Why, pretty well; but not quite well. Poor Perry is bilious, and he hasnot time to take care of himself--he tells me he has not time to takecare of himself--which is very sad--but he is always wanted all roundthe country. I suppose there is not a man in such practice anywhere. Butthen there is not so clever a man any where]
 ["And Mrs. Perry and the children, how are they? do the children grow?I have a great regard for Mr. Perry. I hope he will be calling soon. Hewill be so pleased to see my little ones]
 ["I hope he will be here to-morrow, for I have a question or two to askhim about myself of some consequence. And, my dear, whenever he comes,you had better let him look at little Bella's throat]
 ["Oh! my dear sir, her throat is so much better that I have hardly anyuneasiness about it. Either bathing has been of the greatest service toher, or else it is to be attributed to an excellent embrocation of Mr.Wingfield's, which we have been applying at times ever since August]
 ["It is not very likely, my dear, that bathing should have been of useto her--and if I had known you were wanting an embrocation, I would havespoken to--"You seem to me to have forgotten Mrs. and Miss Bates," said Emma, "Ihave not heard one inquiry after them]
 ["Oh! the good Bateses--I am quite ashamed of myself--but you mentionthem in most of your letters. I hope they are quite well. Good old Mrs.Bates--I will call upon her to-morrow, and take my children.--Theyare always so pleased to see my children.--And that excellent MissBates!--such thorough worthy people!--How are they, sir?""Why, pretty well, my dear, upon the whole. But poor Mrs. Bates had abad cold about a month ago]
 ["How sorry I am! But colds were never so prevalent as they have beenthis autumn. Mr. Wingfield told me that he has never known them moregeneral or heavy--except when it has been quite an influenza]
 ["That has been a good deal the case, my dear; but not to the degree youmention. Perry says that colds have been very general, but not so heavyas he has very often known them in November. Perry does not call italtogether a sickly season]
 ["No, I do not know that Mr. Wingfield considers it _very_ sicklyexcept--"Ah! my poor dear child, the truth is, that in London it is alwaysa sickly season. Nobody is healthy in London, nobody can be. It is adreadful thing to have you forced to live there! so far off!--and theair so bad!""No, indeed--_we_ are not at all in a bad air. Our part of London isvery superior to most others!--You must not confound us with Londonin general, my dear sir. The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is verydifferent from almost all the rest. We are so very airy! I should beunwilling, I own, to live in any other part of the town;--there ishardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my children in:but _we_ are so remarkably airy!--Mr. Wingfield thinks the vicinity ofBrunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as to air]
 ["Ah! my dear, it is not like Hartfield. You make the best of it--butafter you have been a week at Hartfield, you are all of you differentcreatures; you do not look like the same. Now I cannot say, that I thinkyou are any of you looking well at present]
 ["I am sorry to hear you say so, sir; but I assure you, excepting thoselittle nervous head-aches and palpitations which I am never entirelyfree from anywhere, I am quite well myself; and if the children wererather pale before they went to bed, it was only because they were alittle more tired than usual, from their journey and the happiness ofcoming. I hope you will think better of their looks to-morrow; for Iassure you Mr. Wingfield told me, that he did not believe he had eversent us off altogether, in such good case. I trust, at least, thatyou do not think Mr. Knightley looking ill," turning her eyes withaffectionate anxiety towards her husband]
 [Middling, my dear; I cannot compliment you. I think Mr. John Knightleyvery far from looking well]
 ["What is the matter, sir?--Did you speak to me?" cried Mr. JohnKnightley, hearing his own name]
 [I am sorry to find, my love, that my father does not think you lookingwell--but I hope it is only from being a little fatigued. I could havewished, however, as you know, that you had seen Mr. Wingfield before youleft home]
 ["My dear Isabella,"--exclaimed he hastily--"pray do not concern yourselfabout my looks. Be satisfied with doctoring and coddling yourself andthe children, and let me look as I chuse]
 ["I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brother,"cried Emma, "about your friend Mr. Graham's intending to have a bailifffrom Scotland, to look after his new estate. What will it answer? Willnot the old prejudice be too strong?"And she talked in this way so long and successfully that, when forced togive her attention again to her father and sister, she had nothingworse to hear than Isabella's kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax; and JaneFairfax, though no great favourite with her in general, she was at thatmoment very happy to assist in praising]
 [That sweet, amiable Jane Fairfax!" said Mrs. John Knightley.--"Itis so long since I have seen her, except now and then for a momentaccidentally in town! What happiness it must be to her good oldgrandmother and excellent aunt, when she comes to visit them! I alwaysregret excessively on dear Emma's account that she cannot be more atHighbury; but now their daughter is married, I suppose Colonel and Mrs.Campbell will not be able to part with her at all. She would be such adelightful companion for Emma]
 [Mr. Woodhouse agreed to it all, but added,"Our little friend Harriet Smith, however, is just such another prettykind of young person. You will like Harriet. Emma could not have abetter companion than Harriet]
 ["I am most happy to hear it--but only Jane Fairfax one knows to be sovery accomplished and superior!--and exactly Emma's age]
 [This topic was discussed very happily, and others succeeded of similarmoment, and passed away with similar harmony; but the evening did notclose without a little return of agitation. The gruel came and supplieda great deal to be said--much praise and many comments--undoubtingdecision of its wholesomeness for every constitution, and prettysevere Philippics upon the many houses where it was never met withtolerably;--but, unfortunately, among the failures which the daughterhad to instance, the most recent, and therefore most prominent, was inher own cook at South End, a young woman hired for the time, who neverhad been able to understand what she meant by a basin of nice smoothgruel, thin, but not too thin. Often as she had wished for and orderedit, she had never been able to get any thing tolerable. Here was adangerous opening]
 [Ah!" said Mr. Woodhouse, shaking his head and fixing his eyes on herwith tender concern.--The ejaculation in Emma's ear expressed, "Ah!there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to South End. Itdoes not bear talking of]
 [ And for a little while she hoped he would nottalk of it, and that a silent rumination might suffice to restore him tothe relish of his own smooth gruel. After an interval of some minutes,however, he began with,"I shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumn,instead of coming here]
 ["But why should you be sorry, sir?--I assure you, it did the children agreat deal of good]
 ["And, moreover, if you must go to the sea, it had better not have beento South End. South End is an unhealthy place. Perry was surprized tohear you had fixed upon South End]
 ["I know there is such an idea with many people, but indeed it is quitea mistake, sir.--We all had our health perfectly well there, neverfound the least inconvenience from the mud; and Mr. Wingfield says it isentirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy; and I am sure he maybe depended on, for he thoroughly understands the nature of the air, andhis own brother and family have been there repeatedly]
 ["You should have gone to Cromer, my dear, if you went anywhere.--Perrywas a week at Cromer once, and he holds it to be the best of all thesea-bathing places. A fine open sea, he says, and very pure air. And, bywhat I understand, you might have had lodgings there quite away fromthe sea--a quarter of a mile off--very comfortable. You should haveconsulted Perry]
 ["But, my dear sir, the difference of the journey;--only consider howgreat it would have been.--An hundred miles, perhaps, instead of forty]
 ["Ah! my dear, as Perry says, where health is at stake, nothing elseshould be considered; and if one is to travel, there is not much tochuse between forty miles and an hundred.--Better not move at all,better stay in London altogether than travel forty miles to get intoa worse air. This is just what Perry said. It seemed to him a veryill-judged measure]
 [Emma's attempts to stop her father had been vain; and when hehad reached such a point as this, she could not wonder at herbrother-in-law's breaking out]
 [Mr. Perry," said he, in a voice of very strong displeasure, "would doas well to keep his opinion till it is asked for. Why does he make itany business of his, to wonder at what I do?--at my taking my family toone part of the coast or another?--I may be allowed, I hope, the use ofmy judgment as well as Mr. Perry.--I want his directions no more thanhis drugs]
 [ He paused--and growing cooler in a moment, added, with onlysarcastic dryness, "If Mr. Perry can tell me how to convey a wife andfive children a distance of an hundred and thirty miles with no greaterexpense or inconvenience than a distance of forty, I should be aswilling to prefer Cromer to South End as he could himself]
 ["True, true," cried Mr. Knightley, with most ready interposition--"verytrue. That's a consideration indeed.--But John, as to what I was tellingyou of my idea of moving the path to Langham, of turning it more to theright that it may not cut through the home meadows, I cannot conceiveany difficulty. I should not attempt it, if it were to be the means ofinconvenience to the Highbury people, but if you call to mind exactlythe present line of the path.... The only way of proving it, however,will be to turn to our maps. I shall see you at the Abbey to-morrowmorning I hope, and then we will look them over, and you shall give meyour opinion]
 [Mr. Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflections on hisfriend Perry, to whom he had, in fact, though unconsciously, beenattributing many of his own feelings and expressions;--but the soothingattentions of his daughters gradually removed the present evil, andthe immediate alertness of one brother, and better recollections of theother, prevented any renewal of it.CHAPTER XIIIThere could hardly be a happier creature in the world than Mrs. JohnKnightley, in this short visit to Hartfield, going about every morningamong her old acquaintance with her five children, and talking over whatshe had done every evening with her father and sister. She had nothingto wish otherwise, but that the days did not pass so swiftly. It was adelightful visit;--perfect, in being much too short.In general their evenings were less engaged with friends than theirmornings; but one complete dinner engagement, and out of the house too,there was no avoiding, though at Christmas. Mr. Weston would take nodenial; they must all dine at Randalls one day;--even Mr. Woodhouse waspersuaded to think it a possible thing in preference to a division ofthe party.How they were all to be conveyed, he would have made a difficulty if hecould, but as his son and daughter's carriage and horses were actuallyat Hartfield, he was not able to make more than a simple question onthat head; it hardly amounted to a doubt; nor did it occupy Emma longto convince him that they might in one of the carriages find room forHarriet also.Harriet, Mr. Elton, and Mr. Knightley, their own especial set, were theonly persons invited to meet them;--the hours were to be early, aswell as the numbers few; Mr. Woodhouse's habits and inclination beingconsulted in every thing.The evening before this great event (for it was a very great event thatMr. Woodhouse should dine out, on the 24th of December) had been spentby Harriet at Hartfield, and she had gone home so much indisposed witha cold, that, but for her own earnest wish of being nursed by Mrs.Goddard, Emma could not have allowed her to leave the house. Emma calledon her the next day, and found her doom already signed with regard toRandalls. She was very feverish and had a bad sore throat: Mrs. Goddardwas full of care and affection, Mr. Perry was talked of, and Harrietherself was too ill and low to resist the authority which excluded herfrom this delightful engagement, though she could not speak of her losswithout many tears.Emma sat with her as long as she could, to attend her in Mrs. Goddard'sunavoidable absences, and raise her spirits by representing how much Mr.Elton's would be depressed when he knew her state; and left her at lasttolerably comfortable, in the sweet dependence of his having a mostcomfortless visit, and of their all missing her very much. She had notadvanced many yards from Mrs. Goddard's door, when she was met by Mr.Elton himself, evidently coming towards it, and as they walked on slowlytogether in conversation about the invalid--of whom he, on the rumourof considerable illness, had been going to inquire, that he mightcarry some report of her to Hartfield--they were overtaken by Mr. JohnKnightley returning from the daily visit to Donwell, with his two eldestboys, whose healthy, glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a countryrun, and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton and ricepudding they were hastening home for. They joined company andproceeded together. Emma was just describing the nature of her friend'scomplaint;--"a throat very much inflamed, with a great deal of heatabout her, a quick, low pulse, &c. and she was sorry to find from Mrs.Goddard that Harriet was liable to very bad sore-throats, and had oftenalarmed her with them]
 [ Mr. Elton looked all alarm on the occasion, ashe exclaimed,"A sore-throat!--I hope not infectious. I hope not of a putridinfectious sort. Has Perry seen her? Indeed you should take care ofyourself as well as of your friend. Let me entreat you to run no risks.Why does not Perry see her?"Emma, who was not really at all frightened herself, tranquillised thisexcess of apprehension by assurances of Mrs. Goddard's experience andcare; but as there must still remain a degree of uneasiness which shecould not wish to reason away, which she would rather feed and assistthan not, she added soon afterwards--as if quite another subject,"It is so cold, so very cold--and looks and feels so very much likesnow, that if it were to any other place or with any other party, Ishould really try not to go out to-day--and dissuade my father fromventuring; but as he has made up his mind, and does not seem to feel thecold himself, I do not like to interfere, as I know it would be so greata disappointment to Mr. and Mrs. Weston. But, upon my word, Mr. Elton,in your case, I should certainly excuse myself. You appear to me alittle hoarse already, and when you consider what demand of voice andwhat fatigues to-morrow will bring, I think it would be no more thancommon prudence to stay at home and take care of yourself to-night]
 [Mr. Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make;which was exactly the case; for though very much gratified by the kindcare of such a fair lady, and not liking to resist any advice of her's,he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit;--but Emma,too eager and busy in her own previous conceptions and views to hear himimpartially, or see him with clear vision, was very well satisfied withhis muttering acknowledgment of its being "very cold, certainly verycold," and walked on, rejoicing in having extricated him from Randalls,and secured him the power of sending to inquire after Harriet every hourof the evening]
 [You do quite right," said she;--"we will make your apologies to Mr. andMrs. Weston]
 [But hardly had she so spoken, when she found her brother was civillyoffering a seat in his carriage, if the weather were Mr. Elton's onlyobjection, and Mr. Elton actually accepting the offer with much promptsatisfaction. It was a done thing; Mr. Elton was to go, and never hadhis broad handsome face expressed more pleasure than at this moment;never had his smile been stronger, nor his eyes more exulting than whenhe next looked at her]
 [Well," said she to herself, "this is most strange!--After I had gothim off so well, to chuse to go into company, and leave Harriet illbehind!--Most strange indeed!--But there is, I believe, in many men,especially single men, such an inclination--such a passion for diningout--a dinner engagement is so high in the class of their pleasures,their employments, their dignities, almost their duties, that anything gives way to it--and this must be the case with Mr. Elton; a mostvaluable, amiable, pleasing young man undoubtedly, and very much in lovewith Harriet; but still, he cannot refuse an invitation, he must dineout wherever he is asked. What a strange thing love is! he can see readywit in Harriet, but will not dine alone for her]
 [Soon afterwards Mr. Elton quitted them, and she could not but do himthe justice of feeling that there was a great deal of sentiment in hismanner of naming Harriet at parting; in the tone of his voice whileassuring her that he should call at Mrs. Goddard's for news of her fairfriend, the last thing before he prepared for the happiness of meetingher again, when he hoped to be able to give a better report; andhe sighed and smiled himself off in a way that left the balance ofapprobation much in his favour.After a few minutes of entire silence between them, John Knightley beganwith--"I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than Mr.Elton. It is downright labour to him where ladies are concerned. Withmen he can be rational and unaffected, but when he has ladies to please,every feature works]
 ["Mr. Elton's manners are not perfect," replied Emma; "but where there isa wish to please, one ought to overlook, and one does overlook a greatdeal. Where a man does his best with only moderate powers, he willhave the advantage over negligent superiority. There is such perfectgood-temper and good-will in Mr. Elton as one cannot but value]
 ["Yes," said Mr. John Knightley presently, with some slyness, "he seemsto have a great deal of good-will towards you]
 ["Me!" she replied with a smile of astonishment, "are you imagining me tobe Mr. Elton's object?""Such an imagination has crossed me, I own, Emma; and if it neveroccurred to you before, you may as well take it into consideration now]
 ["Mr. Elton in love with me!--What an idea!""I do not say it is so; but you will do well to consider whether itis so or not, and to regulate your behaviour accordingly. I think yourmanners to him encouraging. I speak as a friend, Emma. You had betterlook about you, and ascertain what you do, and what you mean to do]
 ["I thank you; but I assure you you are quite mistaken. Mr. Elton andI are very good friends, and nothing more;" and she walked on, amusingherself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from apartial knowledge of circumstances, of the mistakes which people of highpretensions to judgment are for ever falling into; and not very wellpleased with her brother for imagining her blind and ignorant, and inwant of counsel. He said no more.Mr. Woodhouse had so completely made up his mind to the visit, that inspite of the increasing coldness, he seemed to have no idea of shrinkingfrom it, and set forward at last most punctually with his eldestdaughter in his own carriage, with less apparent consciousness of theweather than either of the others; too full of the wonder of his owngoing, and the pleasure it was to afford at Randalls to see that it wascold, and too well wrapt up to feel it. The cold, however, was severe;and by the time the second carriage was in motion, a few flakes of snowwere finding their way down, and the sky had the appearance of being soovercharged as to want only a milder air to produce a very white worldin a very short time.Emma soon saw that her companion was not in the happiest humour. Thepreparing and the going abroad in such weather, with the sacrifice ofhis children after dinner, were evils, were disagreeables at least,which Mr. John Knightley did not by any means like; he anticipatednothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase; and thewhole of their drive to the vicarage was spent by him in expressing hisdiscontent]
 [A man," said he, "must have a very good opinion of himself when he askspeople to leave their own fireside, and encounter such a day asthis, for the sake of coming to see him. He must think himself a mostagreeable fellow; I could not do such a thing. It is the greatestabsurdity--Actually snowing at this moment!--The folly of not allowingpeople to be comfortable at home--and the folly of people's not stayingcomfortably at home when they can! If we were obliged to go out suchan evening as this, by any call of duty or business, what a hardship weshould deem it;--and here are we, probably with rather thinner clothingthan usual, setting forward voluntarily, without excuse, in defiance ofthe voice of nature, which tells man, in every thing given to his viewor his feelings, to stay at home himself, and keep all under shelterthat he can;--here are we setting forward to spend five dull hours inanother man's house, with nothing to say or to hear that was not saidand heard yesterday, and may not be said and heard again to-morrow.Going in dismal weather, to return probably in worse;--four horses andfour servants taken out for nothing but to convey five idle, shiveringcreatures into colder rooms and worse company than they might have hadat home]
 [Emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased assent, which nodoubt he was in the habit of receiving, to emulate the "Very true,my love," which must have been usually administered by his travellingcompanion; but she had resolution enough to refrain from makingany answer at all. She could not be complying, she dreaded beingquarrelsome; her heroism reached only to silence. She allowed him totalk, and arranged the glasses, and wrapped herself up, without openingher lips.They arrived, the carriage turned, the step was let down, and Mr. Elton,spruce, black, and smiling, was with them instantly. Emma thought withpleasure of some change of subject. Mr. Elton was all obligation andcheerfulness; he was so very cheerful in his civilities indeed, that shebegan to think he must have received a different account of Harriet fromwhat had reached her. She had sent while dressing, and the answer hadbeen, "Much the same--not better]
 ["_My_ report from Mrs. Goddard's," said she presently, "was not sopleasant as I had hoped--'Not better' was _my_ answer]
 [His face lengthened immediately; and his voice was the voice ofsentiment as he answered]
 [Oh! no--I am grieved to find--I was on the point of telling you thatwhen I called at Mrs. Goddard's door, which I did the very last thingbefore I returned to dress, I was told that Miss Smith was not better,by no means better, rather worse. Very much grieved and concerned--Ihad flattered myself that she must be better after such a cordial as Iknew had been given her in the morning]
 [Emma smiled and answered--"My visit was of use to the nervous part ofher complaint, I hope; but not even I can charm away a sore throat;it is a most severe cold indeed. Mr. Perry has been with her, as youprobably heard]
 ["Yes--I imagined--that is--I did not--""He has been used to her in these complaints, and I hope to-morrowmorning will bring us both a more comfortable report. But it isimpossible not to feel uneasiness. Such a sad loss to our party to-day!""Dreadful!--Exactly so, indeed.--She will be missed every moment]
 [This was very proper; the sigh which accompanied it was reallyestimable; but it should have lasted longer. Emma was rather in dismaywhen only half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other things,and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment]
 [What an excellent device," said he, "the use of a sheepskin forcarriages. How very comfortable they make it;--impossible to feel coldwith such precautions. The contrivances of modern days indeed haverendered a gentleman's carriage perfectly complete. One is so fencedand guarded from the weather, that not a breath of air can find its wayunpermitted. Weather becomes absolutely of no consequence. It is a verycold afternoon--but in this carriage we know nothing of the matter.--Ha!snows a little I see]
 ["Yes," said John Knightley, "and I think we shall have a good deal ofit]
 ["Christmas weather," observed Mr. Elton. "Quite seasonable; andextremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did not beginyesterday, and prevent this day's party, which it might very possiblyhave done, for Mr. Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there beenmuch snow on the ground; but now it is of no consequence. This is quitethe season indeed for friendly meetings. At Christmas every body invitestheir friends about them, and people think little of even the worstweather. I was snowed up at a friend's house once for a week. Nothingcould be pleasanter. I went for only one night, and could not get awaytill that very day se'nnight]
 [Mr. John Knightley looked as if he did not comprehend the pleasure, butsaid only, coolly,"I cannot wish to be snowed up a week at Randalls]
 [At another time Emma might have been amused, but she was too muchastonished now at Mr. Elton's spirits for other feelings. Harriet seemedquite forgotten in the expectation of a pleasant party]
 [We are sure of excellent fires," continued he, "and every thing in thegreatest comfort. Charming people, Mr. and Mrs. Weston;--Mrs. Westonindeed is much beyond praise, and he is exactly what one values, sohospitable, and so fond of society;--it will be a small party, but wheresmall parties are select, they are perhaps the most agreeable of any.Mr. Weston's dining-room does not accommodate more than ten comfortably;and for my part, I would rather, under such circumstances, fall short bytwo than exceed by two. I think you will agree with me, (turning witha soft air to Emma,) I think I shall certainly have your approbation,though Mr. Knightley perhaps, from being used to the large parties ofLondon, may not quite enter into our feelings]
 ["I know nothing of the large parties of London, sir--I never dine withany body]
 ["Indeed! (in a tone of wonder and pity,) I had no idea that the law hadbeen so great a slavery. Well, sir, the time must come when you willbe paid for all this, when you will have little labour and greatenjoyment]
 ["My first enjoyment," replied John Knightley, as they passed through thesweep-gate, "will be to find myself safe at Hartfield again]
 [CHAPTER XIVSome change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman as theywalked into Mrs. Weston's drawing-room;--Mr. Elton must compose hisjoyous looks, and Mr. John Knightley disperse his ill-humour. Mr.Elton must smile less, and Mr. John Knightley more, to fit them for theplace.--Emma only might be as nature prompted, and shew herself just ashappy as she was. To her it was real enjoyment to be with the Westons.Mr. Weston was a great favourite, and there was not a creature in theworld to whom she spoke with such unreserve, as to his wife; not anyone, to whom she related with such conviction of being listened to andunderstood, of being always interesting and always intelligible, thelittle affairs, arrangements, perplexities, and pleasures of her fatherand herself. She could tell nothing of Hartfield, in which Mrs. Westonhad not a lively concern; and half an hour's uninterrupted communicationof all those little matters on which the daily happiness of private lifedepends, was one of the first gratifications of each.This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day's visit might notafford, which certainly did not belong to the present half-hour; but thevery sight of Mrs. Weston, her smile, her touch, her voice was gratefulto Emma, and she determined to think as little as possible of Mr.Elton's oddities, or of any thing else unpleasant, and enjoy all thatwas enjoyable to the utmost.The misfortune of Harriet's cold had been pretty well gone throughbefore her arrival. Mr. Woodhouse had been safely seated long enoughto give the history of it, besides all the history of his own andIsabella's coming, and of Emma's being to follow, and had indeed justgot to the end of his satisfaction that James should come and see hisdaughter, when the others appeared, and Mrs. Weston, who had been almostwholly engrossed by her attentions to him, was able to turn away andwelcome her dear Emma.Emma's project of forgetting Mr. Elton for a while made her rather sorryto find, when they had all taken their places, that he was close to her.The difficulty was great of driving his strange insensibility towardsHarriet, from her mind, while he not only sat at her elbow, butwas continually obtruding his happy countenance on her notice, andsolicitously addressing her upon every occasion. Instead of forgettinghim, his behaviour was such that she could not avoid the internalsuggestion of "Can it really be as my brother imagined? can it bepossible for this man to be beginning to transfer his affections fromHarriet to me?--Absurd and insufferable!"--Yet he would be so anxiousfor her being perfectly warm, would be so interested about her father,and so delighted with Mrs. Weston; and at last would begin admiring herdrawings with so much zeal and so little knowledge as seemed terriblylike a would-be lover, and made it some effort with her to preserve hergood manners. For her own sake she could not be rude; and for Harriet's,in the hope that all would yet turn out right, she was even positivelycivil; but it was an effort; especially as something was going onamongst the others, in the most overpowering period of Mr. Elton'snonsense, which she particularly wished to listen to. She heard enoughto know that Mr. Weston was giving some information about his son; sheheard the words "my son," and "Frank," and "my son," repeated severaltimes over; and, from a few other half-syllables very much suspectedthat he was announcing an early visit from his son; but before she couldquiet Mr. Elton, the subject was so completely past that any revivingquestion from her would have been awkward.Now, it so happened that in spite of Emma's resolution of nevermarrying, there was something in the name, in the idea of Mr.Frank Churchill, which always interested her. She had frequentlythought--especially since his father's marriage with Miss Taylor--thatif she _were_ to marry, he was the very person to suit her in age,character and condition. He seemed by this connexion between thefamilies, quite to belong to her. She could not but suppose it to bea match that every body who knew them must think of. That Mr. and Mrs.Weston did think of it, she was very strongly persuaded; and thoughnot meaning to be induced by him, or by any body else, to give up asituation which she believed more replete with good than any she couldchange it for, she had a great curiosity to see him, a decided intentionof finding him pleasant, of being liked by him to a certain degree, anda sort of pleasure in the idea of their being coupled in their friends'imaginations.With such sensations, Mr. Elton's civilities were dreadfully ill-timed;but she had the comfort of appearing very polite, while feeling verycross--and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not possiblypass without bringing forward the same information again, or thesubstance of it, from the open-hearted Mr. Weston.--So it proved;--forwhen happily released from Mr. Elton, and seated by Mr. Weston,at dinner, he made use of the very first interval in the cares ofhospitality, the very first leisure from the saddle of mutton, to say toher,"We want only two more to be just the right number. I should like to seetwo more here,--your pretty little friend, Miss Smith, and my son--andthen I should say we were quite complete. I believe you did not hear metelling the others in the drawing-room that we are expecting Frank.I had a letter from him this morning, and he will be with us within afortnight]
 [Emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure; and fully assented tohis proposition of Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Smith making their partyquite complete]
 [He has been wanting to come to us," continued Mr. Weston, "ever sinceSeptember: every letter has been full of it; but he cannot command hisown time. He has those to please who must be pleased, and who (betweenourselves) are sometimes to be pleased only by a good many sacrifices.But now I have no doubt of seeing him here about the second week inJanuary]
 ["What a very great pleasure it will be to you! and Mrs. Weston is soanxious to be acquainted with him, that she must be almost as happy asyourself]
 ["Yes, she would be, but that she thinks there will be another put-off.She does not depend upon his coming so much as I do: but she does notknow the parties so well as I do. The case, you see, is--(but this isquite between ourselves: I did not mention a syllable of it in the otherroom. There are secrets in all families, you know)--The case is, that aparty of friends are invited to pay a visit at Enscombe in January; andthat Frank's coming depends upon their being put off. If they are notput off, he cannot stir. But I know they will, because it is a familythat a certain lady, of some consequence, at Enscombe, has a particulardislike to: and though it is thought necessary to invite them once intwo or three years, they always are put off when it comes to the point.I have not the smallest doubt of the issue. I am as confident of seeingFrank here before the middle of January, as I am of being here myself:but your good friend there (nodding towards the upper end of the table)has so few vagaries herself, and has been so little used to them atHartfield, that she cannot calculate on their effects, as I have beenlong in the practice of doing]
 ["I am sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the case," repliedEmma; "but am disposed to side with you, Mr. Weston. If you think hewill come, I shall think so too; for you know Enscombe]
 ["Yes--I have some right to that knowledge; though I have never been atthe place in my life.--She is an odd woman!--But I never allow myselfto speak ill of her, on Frank's account; for I do believe her to be veryfond of him. I used to think she was not capable of being fond ofany body, except herself: but she has always been kind to him (in herway--allowing for little whims and caprices, and expecting every thingto be as she likes). And it is no small credit, in my opinion, to him,that he should excite such an affection; for, though I would not sayit to any body else, she has no more heart than a stone to people ingeneral; and the devil of a temper]
 [Emma liked the subject so well, that she began upon it, to Mrs. Weston,very soon after their moving into the drawing-room: wishing her joy--yetobserving, that she knew the first meeting must be rather alarming.--Mrs. Weston agreed to it; but added, that she should be very glad to besecure of undergoing the anxiety of a first meeting at the time talkedof: "for I cannot depend upon his coming. I cannot be so sanguine asMr. Weston. I am very much afraid that it will all end in nothing. Mr.Weston, I dare say, has been telling you exactly how the matter stands?""Yes--it seems to depend upon nothing but the ill-humour of Mrs.Churchill, which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world]
 ["My Emma!" replied Mrs. Weston, smiling, "what is the certaintyof caprice?" Then turning to Isabella, who had not been attendingbefore--"You must know, my dear Mrs. Knightley, that we are by no meansso sure of seeing Mr. Frank Churchill, in my opinion, as his fatherthinks. It depends entirely upon his aunt's spirits and pleasure; inshort, upon her temper. To you--to my two daughters--I may venture onthe truth. Mrs. Churchill rules at Enscombe, and is a very odd-temperedwoman; and his coming now, depends upon her being willing to spare him]
 ["Oh, Mrs. Churchill; every body knows Mrs. Churchill," replied Isabella:"and I am sure I never think of that poor young man without the greatestcompassion. To be constantly living with an ill-tempered person, mustbe dreadful. It is what we happily have never known any thing of; butit must be a life of misery. What a blessing, that she never had anychildren! Poor little creatures, how unhappy she would have made them!"Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs. Weston. She should then haveheard more: Mrs. Weston would speak to her, with a degree of unreservewhich she would not hazard with Isabella; and, she really believed,would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the Churchillsfrom her, excepting those views on the young man, of which her ownimagination had already given her such instinctive knowledge. But atpresent there was nothing more to be said. Mr. Woodhouse very soonfollowed them into the drawing-room. To be sitting long afterdinner, was a confinement that he could not endure. Neither wine norconversation was any thing to him; and gladly did he move to those withwhom he was always comfortable.While he talked to Isabella, however, Emma found an opportunity ofsaying,"And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any meanscertain. I am sorry for it. The introduction must be unpleasant,whenever it takes place; and the sooner it could be over, the better]
 ["Yes; and every delay makes one more apprehensive of other delays. Evenif this family, the Braithwaites, are put off, I am still afraid thatsome excuse may be found for disappointing us. I cannot bear to imagineany reluctance on his side; but I am sure there is a great wish onthe Churchills' to keep him to themselves. There is jealousy. Theyare jealous even of his regard for his father. In short, I can feel nodependence on his coming, and I wish Mr. Weston were less sanguine]
 ["He ought to come," said Emma. "If he could stay only a couple of days,he ought to come; and one can hardly conceive a young man's not havingit in his power to do as much as that. A young _woman_, if she fall intobad hands, may be teased, and kept at a distance from those she wantsto be with; but one cannot comprehend a young _man_'s being under suchrestraint, as not to be able to spend a week with his father, if helikes it]
 ["One ought to be at Enscombe, and know the ways of the family, beforeone decides upon what he can do," replied Mrs. Weston. "One ought touse the same caution, perhaps, in judging of the conduct of any oneindividual of any one family; but Enscombe, I believe, certainly mustnot be judged by general rules: _she_ is so very unreasonable; and everything gives way to her]
 ["But she is so fond of the nephew: he is so very great a favourite. Now,according to my idea of Mrs. Churchill, it would be most natural, thatwhile she makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband, to whom sheowes every thing, while she exercises incessant caprice towards _him_,she should frequently be governed by the nephew, to whom she owesnothing at all]
 ["My dearest Emma, do not pretend, with your sweet temper, to understanda bad one, or to lay down rules for it: you must let it go its own way.I have no doubt of his having, at times, considerable influence; but itmay be perfectly impossible for him to know beforehand _when_ it willbe]
 [Emma listened, and then coolly said, "I shall not be satisfied, unlesshe comes]
 ["He may have a great deal of influence on some points," continued Mrs.Weston, "and on others, very little: and among those, on which she isbeyond his reach, it is but too likely, may be this very circumstance ofhis coming away from them to visit us]
 [CHAPTER XVMr. Woodhouse was soon ready for his tea; and when he had drank histea he was quite ready to go home; and it was as much as his threecompanions could do, to entertain away his notice of the lateness ofthe hour, before the other gentlemen appeared. Mr. Weston was chatty andconvivial, and no friend to early separations of any sort; but at lastthe drawing-room party did receive an augmentation. Mr. Elton, in verygood spirits, was one of the first to walk in. Mrs. Weston and Emmawere sitting together on a sofa. He joined them immediately, and, withscarcely an invitation, seated himself between them.Emma, in good spirits too, from the amusement afforded her mind bythe expectation of Mr. Frank Churchill, was willing to forget his lateimproprieties, and be as well satisfied with him as before, and on hismaking Harriet his very first subject, was ready to listen with mostfriendly smiles.He professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend--her fair,lovely, amiable friend. "Did she know?--had she heard any thing abouther, since their being at Randalls?--he felt much anxiety--he mustconfess that the nature of her complaint alarmed him considerably]
 [And in this style he talked on for some time very properly, not muchattending to any answer, but altogether sufficiently awake to the terrorof a bad sore throat; and Emma was quite in charity with him.But at last there seemed a perverse turn; it seemed all at once as if hewere more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account, than onHarriet's--more anxious that she should escape the infection, thanthat there should be no infection in the complaint. He began with greatearnestness to entreat her to refrain from visiting the sick-chamberagain, for the present--to entreat her to _promise_ _him_ not to ventureinto such hazard till he had seen Mr. Perry and learnt his opinion; andthough she tried to laugh it off and bring the subject back into itsproper course, there was no putting an end to his extreme solicitudeabout her. She was vexed. It did appear--there was no concealingit--exactly like the pretence of being in love with her, instead ofHarriet; an inconstancy, if real, the most contemptible and abominable!and she had difficulty in behaving with temper. He turned to Mrs. Westonto implore her assistance, "Would not she give him her support?--wouldnot she add her persuasions to his, to induce Miss Woodhouse not to goto Mrs. Goddard's till it were certain that Miss Smith's disorder hadno infection? He could not be satisfied without a promise--would not shegive him her influence in procuring it?""So scrupulous for others," he continued, "and yet so careless forherself! She wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home to-day, andyet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated sorethroat herself. Is this fair, Mrs. Weston?--Judge between us. Have not Isome right to complain? I am sure of your kind support and aid]
 [Emma saw Mrs. Weston's surprize, and felt that it must be great, at anaddress which, in words and manner, was assuming to himself the right offirst interest in her; and as for herself, she was too much provoked andoffended to have the power of directly saying any thing to the purpose.She could only give him a look; but it was such a look as she thoughtmust restore him to his senses, and then left the sofa, removing to aseat by her sister, and giving her all her attention.She had not time to know how Mr. Elton took the reproof, so rapidly didanother subject succeed; for Mr. John Knightley now came into the roomfrom examining the weather, and opened on them all with the informationof the ground being covered with snow, and of its still snowingfast, with a strong drifting wind; concluding with these words to Mr.Woodhouse:"This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagements,sir. Something new for your coachman and horses to be making their waythrough a storm of snow]
 [Poor Mr. Woodhouse was silent from consternation; but every body elsehad something to say; every body was either surprized or not surprized,and had some question to ask, or some comfort to offer. Mrs. Westonand Emma tried earnestly to cheer him and turn his attention from hisson-in-law, who was pursuing his triumph rather unfeelingly]
 [I admired your resolution very much, sir," said he, "in venturing outin such weather, for of course you saw there would be snow very soon.Every body must have seen the snow coming on. I admired your spirit; andI dare say we shall get home very well. Another hour or two's snow canhardly make the road impassable; and we are two carriages; if one isblown over in the bleak part of the common field there will be the otherat hand. I dare say we shall be all safe at Hartfield before midnight]
 [Mr. Weston, with triumph of a different sort, was confessing that hehad known it to be snowing some time, but had not said a word, lestit should make Mr. Woodhouse uncomfortable, and be an excuse for hishurrying away. As to there being any quantity of snow fallen or likelyto fall to impede their return, that was a mere joke; he was afraid theywould find no difficulty. He wished the road might be impassable, thathe might be able to keep them all at Randalls; and with the utmostgood-will was sure that accommodation might be found for every body,calling on his wife to agree with him, that with a little contrivance,every body might be lodged, which she hardly knew how to do, from theconsciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house]
 [What is to be done, my dear Emma?--what is to be done?" was Mr.Woodhouse's first exclamation, and all that he could say for sometime. To her he looked for comfort; and her assurances of safety, herrepresentation of the excellence of the horses, and of James, and oftheir having so many friends about them, revived him a little.His eldest daughter's alarm was equal to his own. The horror of beingblocked up at Randalls, while her children were at Hartfield, was fullin her imagination; and fancying the road to be now just passable foradventurous people, but in a state that admitted no delay, she was eagerto have it settled, that her father and Emma should remain at Randalls,while she and her husband set forward instantly through all the possibleaccumulations of drifted snow that might impede them]
 [You had better order the carriage directly, my love," said she; "I daresay we shall be able to get along, if we set off directly; and if wedo come to any thing very bad, I can get out and walk. I am not at allafraid. I should not mind walking half the way. I could change my shoes,you know, the moment I got home; and it is not the sort of thing thatgives me cold]
 ["Indeed!" replied he. "Then, my dear Isabella, it is the mostextraordinary sort of thing in the world, for in general every thingdoes give you cold. Walk home!--you are prettily shod for walking home,I dare say. It will be bad enough for the horses]
 [Isabella turned to Mrs. Weston for her approbation of the plan. Mrs.Weston could only approve. Isabella then went to Emma; but Emma couldnot so entirely give up the hope of their being all able to get away;and they were still discussing the point, when Mr. Knightley, who hadleft the room immediately after his brother's first report of the snow,came back again, and told them that he had been out of doors to examine,and could answer for there not being the smallest difficulty in theirgetting home, whenever they liked it, either now or an hour hence. Hehad gone beyond the sweep--some way along the Highbury road--the snowwas nowhere above half an inch deep--in many places hardly enough towhiten the ground; a very few flakes were falling at present, but theclouds were parting, and there was every appearance of its being soonover. He had seen the coachmen, and they both agreed with him in therebeing nothing to apprehend.To Isabella, the relief of such tidings was very great, and they werescarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father's account, whowas immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervousconstitution allowed; but the alarm that had been raised could not beappeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continued atRandalls. He was satisfied of there being no present danger in returninghome, but no assurances could convince him that it was safe to stay; andwhile the others were variously urging and recommending, Mr. Knightleyand Emma settled it in a few brief sentences: thus--"Your father will not be easy; why do not you go?""I am ready, if the others are]
 ["Shall I ring the bell?""Yes, do]
 [And the bell was rung, and the carriages spoken for. A few minutes more,and Emma hoped to see one troublesome companion deposited in his ownhouse, to get sober and cool, and the other recover his temper andhappiness when this visit of hardship were over.The carriage came: and Mr. Woodhouse, always the first object on suchoccasions, was carefully attended to his own by Mr. Knightley and Mr.Weston; but not all that either could say could prevent some renewalof alarm at the sight of the snow which had actually fallen, and thediscovery of a much darker night than he had been prepared for. "He wasafraid they should have a very bad drive. He was afraid poor Isabellawould not like it. And there would be poor Emma in the carriage behind.He did not know what they had best do. They must keep as much togetheras they could;" and James was talked to, and given a charge to go veryslow and wait for the other carriage.Isabella stept in after her father; John Knightley, forgetting that hedid not belong to their party, stept in after his wife very naturally;so that Emma found, on being escorted and followed into the secondcarriage by Mr. Elton, that the door was to be lawfully shut on them,and that they were to have a tete-a-tete drive. It would not have beenthe awkwardness of a moment, it would have been rather a pleasure,previous to the suspicions of this very day; she could have talked tohim of Harriet, and the three-quarters of a mile would have seemed butone. But now, she would rather it had not happened. She believed he hadbeen drinking too much of Mr. Weston's good wine, and felt sure that hewould want to be talking nonsense.To restrain him as much as might be, by her own manners, she wasimmediately preparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity ofthe weather and the night; but scarcely had she begun, scarcely had theypassed the sweep-gate and joined the other carriage, than she found hersubject cut up--her hand seized--her attention demanded, and Mr. Eltonactually making violent love to her: availing himself of the preciousopportunity, declaring sentiments which must be already well known,hoping--fearing--adoring--ready to die if she refused him; butflattering himself that his ardent attachment and unequalled love andunexampled passion could not fail of having some effect, and in short,very much resolved on being seriously accepted as soon as possible. Itreally was so. Without scruple--without apology--without much apparentdiffidence, Mr. Elton, the lover of Harriet, was professing himself_her_ lover. She tried to stop him; but vainly; he would go on, and sayit all. Angry as she was, the thought of the moment made her resolve torestrain herself when she did speak. She felt that half this folly mustbe drunkenness, and therefore could hope that it might belong only tothe passing hour. Accordingly, with a mixture of the serious and theplayful, which she hoped would best suit his half and half state, shereplied,"I am very much astonished, Mr. Elton. This to _me_! you forgetyourself--you take me for my friend--any message to Miss Smith I shallbe happy to deliver; but no more of this to _me_, if you please]
 ["Miss Smith!--message to Miss Smith!--What could she possiblymean!"--And he repeated her words with such assurance of accent, suchboastful pretence of amazement, that she could not help replying withquickness,"Mr. Elton, this is the most extraordinary conduct! and I can accountfor it only in one way; you are not yourself, or you could not speakeither to me, or of Harriet, in such a manner. Command yourself enoughto say no more, and I will endeavour to forget it]
 [But Mr. Elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits, not atall to confuse his intellects. He perfectly knew his own meaning; andhaving warmly protested against her suspicion as most injurious, andslightly touched upon his respect for Miss Smith as her friend,--butacknowledging his wonder that Miss Smith should be mentioned at all,--heresumed the subject of his own passion, and was very urgent for afavourable answer.As she thought less of his inebriety, she thought more of hisinconstancy and presumption; and with fewer struggles for politeness,replied,"It is impossible for me to doubt any longer. You have made yourselftoo clear. Mr. Elton, my astonishment is much beyond any thing I canexpress. After such behaviour, as I have witnessed during the lastmonth, to Miss Smith--such attentions as I have been in the dailyhabit of observing--to be addressing me in this manner--this is anunsteadiness of character, indeed, which I had not supposed possible!Believe me, sir, I am far, very far, from gratified in being the objectof such professions]
 ["Good Heaven!" cried Mr. Elton, "what can be the meaning of this?--MissSmith!--I never thought of Miss Smith in the whole course of myexistence--never paid her any attentions, but as your friend: nevercared whether she were dead or alive, but as your friend. If shehas fancied otherwise, her own wishes have misled her, and I am verysorry--extremely sorry--But, Miss Smith, indeed!--Oh! Miss Woodhouse!who can think of Miss Smith, when Miss Woodhouse is near! No, upon myhonour, there is no unsteadiness of character. I have thought only ofyou. I protest against having paid the smallest attention to any oneelse. Every thing that I have said or done, for many weeks past, hasbeen with the sole view of marking my adoration of yourself. Youcannot really, seriously, doubt it. No!--(in an accent meant to beinsinuating)--I am sure you have seen and understood me]
 [It would be impossible to say what Emma felt, on hearing this--whichof all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost. She was too completelyoverpowered to be immediately able to reply: and two moments of silencebeing ample encouragement for Mr. Elton's sanguine state of mind, hetried to take her hand again, as he joyously exclaimed--"Charming Miss Woodhouse! allow me to interpret this interestingsilence. It confesses that you have long understood me]
 ["No, sir," cried Emma, "it confesses no such thing. So far from havinglong understood you, I have been in a most complete error with respectto your views, till this moment. As to myself, I am very sorry that youshould have been giving way to any feelings--Nothing could be fartherfrom my wishes--your attachment to my friend Harriet--your pursuit ofher, (pursuit, it appeared,) gave me great pleasure, and I have beenvery earnestly wishing you success: but had I supposed that she were notyour attraction to Hartfield, I should certainly have thought you judgedill in making your visits so frequent. Am I to believe that you havenever sought to recommend yourself particularly to Miss Smith?--that youhave never thought seriously of her?""Never, madam," cried he, affronted in his turn: "never, I assure you._I_ think seriously of Miss Smith!--Miss Smith is a very good sort ofgirl; and I should be happy to see her respectably settled. I wishher extremely well: and, no doubt, there are men who might not objectto--Every body has their level: but as for myself, I am not, I think,quite so much at a loss. I need not so totally despair of an equalalliance, as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith!--No, madam, myvisits to Hartfield have been for yourself only; and the encouragement Ireceived--""Encouragement!--I give you encouragement!--Sir, you have been entirelymistaken in supposing it. I have seen you only as the admirer of myfriend. In no other light could you have been more to me than a commonacquaintance. I am exceedingly sorry: but it is well that the mistakeends where it does. Had the same behaviour continued, Miss Smith mighthave been led into a misconception of your views; not being aware,probably, any more than myself, of the very great inequality which youare so sensible of. But, as it is, the disappointment is single, and, Itrust, will not be lasting. I have no thoughts of matrimony at present]
 [He was too angry to say another word; her manner too decided to invitesupplication; and in this state of swelling resentment, and mutuallydeep mortification, they had to continue together a few minutes longer,for the fears of Mr. Woodhouse had confined them to a foot-pace. Ifthere had not been so much anger, there would have been desperateawkwardness; but their straightforward emotions left no room for thelittle zigzags of embarrassment. Without knowing when the carriageturned into Vicarage Lane, or when it stopped, they found themselves,all at once, at the door of his house; and he was out before anothersyllable passed.--Emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a goodnight. The compliment was just returned, coldly and proudly; and, underindescribable irritation of spirits, she was then conveyed to Hartfield.There she was welcomed, with the utmost delight, by her father, whohad been trembling for the dangers of a solitary drive from VicarageLane--turning a corner which he could never bear to think of--and instrange hands--a mere common coachman--no James; and there it seemed asif her return only were wanted to make every thing go well: for Mr.John Knightley, ashamed of his ill-humour, was now all kindness andattention; and so particularly solicitous for the comfort of herfather, as to seem--if not quite ready to join him in a basin ofgruel--perfectly sensible of its being exceedingly wholesome; and theday was concluding in peace and comfort to all their little party,except herself.--But her mind had never been in such perturbation; andit needed a very strong effort to appear attentive and cheerful till theusual hour of separating allowed her the relief of quiet reflection.CHAPTER XVIThe hair was curled, and the maid sent away, and Emma sat down to thinkand be miserable.--It was a wretched business indeed!--Such an overthrowof every thing she had been wishing for!--Such a development of everything most unwelcome!--Such a blow for Harriet!--that was the worstof all. Every part of it brought pain and humiliation, of some sort orother; but, compared with the evil to Harriet, all was light; andshe would gladly have submitted to feel yet more mistaken--more inerror--more disgraced by mis-judgment, than she actually was, could theeffects of her blunders have been confined to herself]
 [If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the man, I could haveborne any thing. He might have doubled his presumption to me--but poorHarriet!"How she could have been so deceived!--He protested that he had neverthought seriously of Harriet--never! She looked back as well asshe could; but it was all confusion. She had taken up the idea, shesupposed, and made every thing bend to it. His manners, however, musthave been unmarked, wavering, dubious, or she could not have been somisled.The picture!--How eager he had been about the picture!--and thecharade!--and an hundred other circumstances;--how clearly they hadseemed to point at Harriet. To be sure, the charade, with its "readywit"--but then the "soft eyes"--in fact it suited neither; it wasa jumble without taste or truth. Who could have seen through suchthick-headed nonsense?Certainly she had often, especially of late, thought his manners toherself unnecessarily gallant; but it had passed as his way, as a mereerror of judgment, of knowledge, of taste, as one proof among othersthat he had not always lived in the best society, that with all thegentleness of his address, true elegance was sometimes wanting; but,till this very day, she had never, for an instant, suspected it to meanany thing but grateful respect to her as Harriet's friend.To Mr. John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on thesubject, for the first start of its possibility. There was no denyingthat those brothers had penetration. She remembered what Mr. Knightleyhad once said to her about Mr. Elton, the caution he had given,the conviction he had professed that Mr. Elton would never marryindiscreetly; and blushed to think how much truer a knowledge of hischaracter had been there shewn than any she had reached herself. Itwas dreadfully mortifying; but Mr. Elton was proving himself, in manyrespects, the very reverse of what she had meant and believed him;proud, assuming, conceited; very full of his own claims, and littleconcerned about the feelings of others.Contrary to the usual course of things, Mr. Elton's wanting to pay hisaddresses to her had sunk him in her opinion. His professions and hisproposals did him no service. She thought nothing of his attachment,and was insulted by his hopes. He wanted to marry well, and having thearrogance to raise his eyes to her, pretended to be in love; but she wasperfectly easy as to his not suffering any disappointment that need becared for. There had been no real affection either in his language ormanners. Sighs and fine words had been given in abundance; but she couldhardly devise any set of expressions, or fancy any tone of voice, lessallied with real love. She need not trouble herself to pity him. Heonly wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself; and if Miss Woodhouseof Hartfield, the heiress of thirty thousand pounds, were not quite soeasily obtained as he had fancied, he would soon try for Miss Somebodyelse with twenty, or with ten.But--that he should talk of encouragement, should consider her as awareof his views, accepting his attentions, meaning (in short), to marryhim!--should suppose himself her equal in connexion or mind!--look downupon her friend, so well understanding the gradations of rank belowhim, and be so blind to what rose above, as to fancy himself shewing nopresumption in addressing her!--It was most provoking.Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much he was herinferior in talent, and all the elegancies of mind. The very want ofsuch equality might prevent his perception of it; but he must know thatin fortune and consequence she was greatly his superior. He mustknow that the Woodhouses had been settled for several generations atHartfield, the younger branch of a very ancient family--and that theEltons were nobody. The landed property of Hartfield certainly wasinconsiderable, being but a sort of notch in the Donwell Abbey estate,to which all the rest of Highbury belonged; but their fortune, fromother sources, was such as to make them scarcely secondary to DonwellAbbey itself, in every other kind of consequence; and the Woodhouses hadlong held a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood whichMr. Elton had first entered not two years ago, to make his way as hecould, without any alliances but in trade, or any thing to recommend himto notice but his situation and his civility.--But he had fancied herin love with him; that evidently must have been his dependence; andafter raving a little about the seeming incongruity of gentle mannersand a conceited head, Emma was obliged in common honesty to stopand admit that her own behaviour to him had been so complaisant andobliging, so full of courtesy and attention, as (supposing her realmotive unperceived) might warrant a man of ordinary observation anddelicacy, like Mr. Elton, in fancying himself a very decided favourite.If _she_ had so misinterpreted his feelings, she had little right towonder that _he_, with self-interest to blind him, should have mistakenhers.The first error and the worst lay at her door. It was foolish, it waswrong, to take so active a part in bringing any two people together. Itwas adventuring too far, assuming too much, making light of whatought to be serious, a trick of what ought to be simple. She was quiteconcerned and ashamed, and resolved to do such things no more]
 [Here have I," said she, "actually talked poor Harriet into being verymuch attached to this man. She might never have thought of him but forme; and certainly never would have thought of him with hope, if I hadnot assured her of his attachment, for she is as modest and humble as Iused to think him. Oh! that I had been satisfied with persuading her notto accept young Martin. There I was quite right. That was well doneof me; but there I should have stopped, and left the rest to time andchance. I was introducing her into good company, and giving her theopportunity of pleasing some one worth having; I ought not to haveattempted more. But now, poor girl, her peace is cut up for some time.I have been but half a friend to her; and if she were _not_ to feel thisdisappointment so very much, I am sure I have not an idea of any bodyelse who would be at all desirable for her;--William Coxe--Oh! no, Icould not endure William Coxe--a pert young lawyer]
 [She stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse, and then resumed a moreserious, more dispiriting cogitation upon what had been, and might be,and must be. The distressing explanation she had to make to Harriet, andall that poor Harriet would be suffering, with the awkwardness offuture meetings, the difficulties of continuing or discontinuing theacquaintance, of subduing feelings, concealing resentment, and avoidingeclat, were enough to occupy her in most unmirthful reflections sometime longer, and she went to bed at last with nothing settled but theconviction of her having blundered most dreadfully.To youth and natural cheerfulness like Emma's, though under temporarygloom at night, the return of day will hardly fail to bring return ofspirits. The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy,and of powerful operation; and if the distress be not poignant enoughto keep the eyes unclosed, they will be sure to open to sensations ofsoftened pain and brighter hope.Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she had goneto bed, more ready to see alleviations of the evil before her, and todepend on getting tolerably out of it.It was a great consolation that Mr. Elton should not be really inlove with her, or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking todisappoint him--that Harriet's nature should not be of that superiorsort in which the feelings are most acute and retentive--and that therecould be no necessity for any body's knowing what had passed except thethree principals, and especially for her father's being given a moment'suneasiness about it.These were very cheering thoughts; and the sight of a great deal of snowon the ground did her further service, for any thing was welcome thatmight justify their all three being quite asunder at present.The weather was most favourable for her; though Christmas Day, shecould not go to church. Mr. Woodhouse would have been miserable had hisdaughter attempted it, and she was therefore safe from either excitingor receiving unpleasant and most unsuitable ideas. The ground coveredwith snow, and the atmosphere in that unsettled state between frost andthaw, which is of all others the most unfriendly for exercise, everymorning beginning in rain or snow, and every evening setting in tofreeze, she was for many days a most honourable prisoner. No intercoursewith Harriet possible but by note; no church for her on Sunday anymore than on Christmas Day; and no need to find excuses for Mr. Elton'sabsenting himself.It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home; and thoughshe hoped and believed him to be really taking comfort in some societyor other, it was very pleasant to have her father so well satisfied withhis being all alone in his own house, too wise to stir out; and tohear him say to Mr. Knightley, whom no weather could keep entirely fromthem,--"Ah! Mr. Knightley, why do not you stay at home like poor Mr. Elton?"These days of confinement would have been, but for her privateperplexities, remarkably comfortable, as such seclusion exactly suitedher brother, whose feelings must always be of great importance tohis companions; and he had, besides, so thoroughly cleared off hisill-humour at Randalls, that his amiableness never failed him during therest of his stay at Hartfield. He was always agreeable and obliging,and speaking pleasantly of every body. But with all the hopes ofcheerfulness, and all the present comfort of delay, there was still suchan evil hanging over her in the hour of explanation with Harriet, asmade it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at ease.CHAPTER XVIIMr. and Mrs. John Knightley were not detained long at Hartfield. Theweather soon improved enough for those to move who must move; and Mr.Woodhouse having, as usual, tried to persuade his daughter to staybehind with all her children, was obliged to see the whole partyset off, and return to his lamentations over the destiny of poorIsabella;--which poor Isabella, passing her life with those she doatedon, full of their merits, blind to their faults, and always innocentlybusy, might have been a model of right feminine happiness.The evening of the very day on which they went brought a note from Mr.Elton to Mr. Woodhouse, a long, civil, ceremonious note, to say, withMr. Elton's best compliments, "that he was proposing to leave Highburythe following morning in his way to Bath; where, in compliance withthe pressing entreaties of some friends, he had engaged to spend a fewweeks, and very much regretted the impossibility he was under, fromvarious circumstances of weather and business, of taking a personalleave of Mr. Woodhouse, of whose friendly civilities he should everretain a grateful sense--and had Mr. Woodhouse any commands, should behappy to attend to them]
 [Emma was most agreeably surprized.--Mr. Elton's absence just at thistime was the very thing to be desired. She admired him for contrivingit, though not able to give him much credit for the manner in which itwas announced. Resentment could not have been more plainly spoken thanin a civility to her father, from which she was so pointedly excluded.She had not even a share in his opening compliments.--Her name was notmentioned;--and there was so striking a change in all this, and such anill-judged solemnity of leave-taking in his graceful acknowledgments, asshe thought, at first, could not escape her father's suspicion.It did, however.--Her father was quite taken up with the surprize of sosudden a journey, and his fears that Mr. Elton might never get safely tothe end of it, and saw nothing extraordinary in his language. It was avery useful note, for it supplied them with fresh matter for thoughtand conversation during the rest of their lonely evening. Mr. Woodhousetalked over his alarms, and Emma was in spirits to persuade them awaywith all her usual promptitude.She now resolved to keep Harriet no longer in the dark. She had reasonto believe her nearly recovered from her cold, and it was desirable thatshe should have as much time as possible for getting the better ofher other complaint before the gentleman's return. She went to Mrs.Goddard's accordingly the very next day, to undergo the necessarypenance of communication; and a severe one it was.--She had to destroyall the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding--to appear inthe ungracious character of the one preferred--and acknowledge herselfgrossly mistaken and mis-judging in all her ideas on one subject, allher observations, all her convictions, all her prophecies for the lastsix weeks.The confession completely renewed her first shame--and the sight ofHarriet's tears made her think that she should never be in charity withherself again.Harriet bore the intelligence very well--blaming nobody--and in everything testifying such an ingenuousness of disposition and lowly opinionof herself, as must appear with particular advantage at that moment toher friend.Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost;and all that was amiable, all that ought to be attaching, seemed onHarriet's side, not her own. Harriet did not consider herself as havingany thing to complain of. The affection of such a man as Mr. Eltonwould have been too great a distinction.--She never could have deservedhim--and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss Woodhouse wouldhave thought it possible.Her tears fell abundantly--but her grief was so truly artless, thatno dignity could have made it more respectable in Emma's eyes--andshe listened to her and tried to console her with all her heart andunderstanding--really for the time convinced that Harriet was thesuperior creature of the two--and that to resemble her would be more forher own welfare and happiness than all that genius or intelligence coulddo.It was rather too late in the day to set about being simple-minded andignorant; but she left her with every previous resolution confirmed ofbeing humble and discreet, and repressing imagination all the rest ofher life. Her second duty now, inferior only to her father's claims, wasto promote Harriet's comfort, and endeavour to prove her own affectionin some better method than by match-making. She got her to Hartfield,and shewed her the most unvarying kindness, striving to occupy andamuse her, and by books and conversation, to drive Mr. Elton from herthoughts.Time, she knew, must be allowed for this being thoroughly done; andshe could suppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matters ingeneral, and very inadequate to sympathise in an attachment to Mr. Eltonin particular; but it seemed to her reasonable that at Harriet's age,and with the entire extinction of all hope, such a progress might bemade towards a state of composure by the time of Mr. Elton's return, asto allow them all to meet again in the common routine of acquaintance,without any danger of betraying sentiments or increasing them.Harriet did think him all perfection, and maintained the non-existenceof any body equal to him in person or goodness--and did, in truth,prove herself more resolutely in love than Emma had foreseen; but yetit appeared to her so natural, so inevitable to strive against aninclination of that sort _unrequited_, that she could not comprehend itscontinuing very long in equal force.If Mr. Elton, on his return, made his own indifference as evident andindubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do, she could notimagine Harriet's persisting to place her happiness in the sight or therecollection of him.Their being fixed, so absolutely fixed, in the same place, was bad foreach, for all three. Not one of them had the power of removal, or ofeffecting any material change of society. They must encounter eachother, and make the best of it.Harriet was farther unfortunate in the tone of her companions at Mrs.Goddard's; Mr. Elton being the adoration of all the teachers and greatgirls in the school; and it must be at Hartfield only that she couldhave any chance of hearing him spoken of with cooling moderation orrepellent truth. Where the wound had been given, there must the cure befound if anywhere; and Emma felt that, till she saw her in the way ofcure, there could be no true peace for herself.CHAPTER XVIIIMr. Frank Churchill did not come. When the time proposed drew near, Mrs.Weston's fears were justified in the arrival of a letter of excuse. Forthe present, he could not be spared, to his "very great mortificationand regret; but still he looked forward with the hope of coming toRandalls at no distant period]
 [Mrs. Weston was exceedingly disappointed--much more disappointed, infact, than her husband, though her dependence on seeing the young manhad been so much more sober: but a sanguine temper, though for everexpecting more good than occurs, does not always pay for its hopes byany proportionate depression. It soon flies over the present failure,and begins to hope again. For half an hour Mr. Weston was surprized andsorry; but then he began to perceive that Frank's coming two or threemonths later would be a much better plan; better time of year;better weather; and that he would be able, without any doubt, to stayconsiderably longer with them than if he had come sooner.These feelings rapidly restored his comfort, while Mrs. Weston, ofa more apprehensive disposition, foresaw nothing but a repetition ofexcuses and delays; and after all her concern for what her husband wasto suffer, suffered a great deal more herself.Emma was not at this time in a state of spirits to care really about Mr.Frank Churchill's not coming, except as a disappointment at Randalls.The acquaintance at present had no charm for her. She wanted, rather, tobe quiet, and out of temptation; but still, as it was desirable that sheshould appear, in general, like her usual self, she took care to expressas much interest in the circumstance, and enter as warmly into Mr.and Mrs. Weston's disappointment, as might naturally belong to theirfriendship.She was the first to announce it to Mr. Knightley; and exclaimed quiteas much as was necessary, (or, being acting a part, perhaps rathermore,) at the conduct of the Churchills, in keeping him away. She thenproceeded to say a good deal more than she felt, of the advantage ofsuch an addition to their confined society in Surry; the pleasure oflooking at somebody new; the gala-day to Highbury entire, which thesight of him would have made; and ending with reflections on theChurchills again, found herself directly involved in a disagreementwith Mr. Knightley; and, to her great amusement, perceived that she wastaking the other side of the question from her real opinion, and makinguse of Mrs. Weston's arguments against herself]
 [The Churchills are very likely in fault," said Mr. Knightley, coolly;"but I dare say he might come if he would]
 ["I do not know why you should say so. He wishes exceedingly to come; buthis uncle and aunt will not spare him]
 ["I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming, if he made apoint of it. It is too unlikely, for me to believe it without proof]
 ["How odd you are! What has Mr. Frank Churchill done, to make you supposehim such an unnatural creature?""I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature, in suspecting thathe may have learnt to be above his connexions, and to care very littlefor any thing but his own pleasure, from living with those who havealways set him the example of it. It is a great deal more natural thanone could wish, that a young man, brought up by those who are proud,luxurious, and selfish, should be proud, luxurious, and selfish too. IfFrank Churchill had wanted to see his father, he would have contrived itbetween September and January. A man at his age--what is he?--three orfour-and-twenty--cannot be without the means of doing as much as that.It is impossible]
 ["That's easily said, and easily felt by you, who have always been yourown master. You are the worst judge in the world, Mr. Knightley, of thedifficulties of dependence. You do not know what it is to have tempersto manage]
 ["It is not to be conceived that a man of three or four-and-twentyshould not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount. He cannot wantmoney--he cannot want leisure. We know, on the contrary, that he has somuch of both, that he is glad to get rid of them at the idlest haunts inthe kingdom. We hear of him for ever at some watering-place or other. Alittle while ago, he was at Weymouth. This proves that he can leave theChurchills]
 ["Yes, sometimes he can]
 ["And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while; wheneverthere is any temptation of pleasure]
 ["It is very unfair to judge of any body's conduct, without an intimateknowledge of their situation. Nobody, who has not been in the interiorof a family, can say what the difficulties of any individual of thatfamily may be. We ought to be acquainted with Enscombe, and with Mrs.Churchill's temper, before we pretend to decide upon what her nephewcan do. He may, at times, be able to do a great deal more than he can atothers]
 ["There is one thing, Emma, which a man can always do, if he chuses, andthat is, his duty; not by manoeuvring and finessing, but by vigour andresolution. It is Frank Churchill's duty to pay this attention to hisfather. He knows it to be so, by his promises and messages; but if hewished to do it, it might be done. A man who felt rightly would say atonce, simply and resolutely, to Mrs. Churchill--'Every sacrifice ofmere pleasure you will always find me ready to make to your convenience;but I must go and see my father immediately. I know he would be hurt bymy failing in such a mark of respect to him on the present occasion.I shall, therefore, set off to-morrow]
 [--If he would say so to herat once, in the tone of decision becoming a man, there would be noopposition made to his going]
 ["No," said Emma, laughing; "but perhaps there might be some made to hiscoming back again. Such language for a young man entirely dependent, touse!--Nobody but you, Mr. Knightley, would imagine it possible. But youhave not an idea of what is requisite in situations directly opposite toyour own. Mr. Frank Churchill to be making such a speech as that tothe uncle and aunt, who have brought him up, and are to provide forhim!--Standing up in the middle of the room, I suppose, and speaking asloud as he could!--How can you imagine such conduct practicable?""Depend upon it, Emma, a sensible man would find no difficulty in it. Hewould feel himself in the right; and the declaration--made, of course,as a man of sense would make it, in a proper manner--would do him moregood, raise him higher, fix his interest stronger with the people hedepended on, than all that a line of shifts and expedients can ever do.Respect would be added to affection. They would feel that they couldtrust him; that the nephew who had done rightly by his father, would dorightly by them; for they know, as well as he does, as well as all theworld must know, that he ought to pay this visit to his father; andwhile meanly exerting their power to delay it, are in their hearts notthinking the better of him for submitting to their whims. Respect forright conduct is felt by every body. If he would act in this sort ofmanner, on principle, consistently, regularly, their little minds wouldbend to his]
 ["I rather doubt that. You are very fond of bending little minds; butwhere little minds belong to rich people in authority, I think they havea knack of swelling out, till they are quite as unmanageable as greatones. I can imagine, that if you, as you are, Mr. Knightley, were to betransported and placed all at once in Mr. Frank Churchill's situation,you would be able to say and do just what you have been recommending forhim; and it might have a very good effect. The Churchills might not havea word to say in return; but then, you would have no habits of earlyobedience and long observance to break through. To him who has, it mightnot be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independence, and setall their claims on his gratitude and regard at nought. He may have asstrong a sense of what would be right, as you can have, without being soequal, under particular circumstances, to act up to it]
 ["Then it would not be so strong a sense. If it failed to produce equalexertion, it could not be an equal conviction]
 ["Oh, the difference of situation and habit! I wish you would try tounderstand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel in directlyopposing those, whom as child and boy he has been looking up to all hislife]
 ["Our amiable young man is a very weak young man, if this be the firstoccasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right against thewill of others. It ought to have been a habit with him by this time, offollowing his duty, instead of consulting expediency. I can allow forthe fears of the child, but not of the man. As he became rational, heought to have roused himself and shaken off all that was unworthy intheir authority. He ought to have opposed the first attempt on theirside to make him slight his father. Had he begun as he ought, therewould have been no difficulty now]
 ["We shall never agree about him," cried Emma; "but that is nothingextraordinary. I have not the least idea of his being a weak young man:I feel sure that he is not. Mr. Weston would not be blind to folly,though in his own son; but he is very likely to have a more yielding,complying, mild disposition than would suit your notions of man'sperfection. I dare say he has; and though it may cut him off from someadvantages, it will secure him many others]
 ["Yes; all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to move, andof leading a life of mere idle pleasure, and fancying himself extremelyexpert in finding excuses for it. He can sit down and write a fineflourishing letter, full of professions and falsehoods, and persuadehimself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world ofpreserving peace at home and preventing his father's having any right tocomplain. His letters disgust me]
 ["Your feelings are singular. They seem to satisfy every body else]
 ["I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs. Weston. They hardly can satisfya woman of her good sense and quick feelings: standing in a mother'splace, but without a mother's affection to blind her. It is on heraccount that attention to Randalls is doubly due, and she must doublyfeel the omission. Had she been a person of consequence herself, hewould have come I dare say; and it would not have signified whetherhe did or no. Can you think your friend behindhand in these sort ofconsiderations? Do you suppose she does not often say all this toherself? No, Emma, your amiable young man can be amiable only in French,not in English. He may be very 'amiable,' have very good manners, and bevery agreeable; but he can have no English delicacy towards the feelingsof other people: nothing really amiable about him]
 ["You seem determined to think ill of him]
 ["Me!--not at all," replied Mr. Knightley, rather displeased; "I do notwant to think ill of him. I should be as ready to acknowledge his meritsas any other man; but I hear of none, except what are merely personal;that he is well-grown and good-looking, with smooth, plausible manners]
 ["Well, if he have nothing else to recommend him, he will be a treasureat Highbury. We do not often look upon fine young men, well-bred andagreeable. We must not be nice and ask for all the virtues into thebargain. Cannot you imagine, Mr. Knightley, what a _sensation_ hiscoming will produce? There will be but one subject throughout theparishes of Donwell and Highbury; but one interest--one object ofcuriosity; it will be all Mr. Frank Churchill; we shall think and speakof nobody else]
 ["You will excuse my being so much over-powered. If I find himconversable, I shall be glad of his acquaintance; but if he is only achattering coxcomb, he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts]
 ["My idea of him is, that he can adapt his conversation to the taste ofevery body, and has the power as well as the wish of being universallyagreeable. To you, he will talk of farming; to me, of drawing or music;and so on to every body, having that general information on all subjectswhich will enable him to follow the lead, or take the lead, just aspropriety may require, and to speak extremely well on each; that is myidea of him]
 ["And mine," said Mr. Knightley warmly, "is, that if he turn out anything like it, he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing! What!at three-and-twenty to be the king of his company--the great man--thepractised politician, who is to read every body's character, and makeevery body's talents conduce to the display of his own superiority; tobe dispensing his flatteries around, that he may make all appear likefools compared with himself! My dear Emma, your own good sense could notendure such a puppy when it came to the point]
 ["I will say no more about him," cried Emma, "you turn every thing toevil. We are both prejudiced; you against, I for him; and we have nochance of agreeing till he is really here]
 ["Prejudiced! I am not prejudiced]
 ["But I am very much, and without being at all ashamed of it. My love forMr. and Mrs. Weston gives me a decided prejudice in his favour]
 ["He is a person I never think of from one month's end to another," saidMr. Knightley, with a degree of vexation, which made Emma immediatelytalk of something else, though she could not comprehend why he should beangry.To take a dislike to a young man, only because he appeared to be of adifferent disposition from himself, was unworthy the real liberality ofmind which she was always used to acknowledge in him; for with all thehigh opinion of himself, which she had often laid to his charge, she hadnever before for a moment supposed it could make him unjust to the meritof another.VOLUME IICHAPTER IEmma and Harriet had been walking together one morning, and, in Emma'sopinion, had been talking enough of Mr. Elton for that day. She couldnot think that Harriet's solace or her own sins required more; andshe was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject as theyreturned;--but it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded,and after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in winter, andreceiving no other answer than a very plaintive--"Mr. Elton is so goodto the poor!" she found something else must be done.They were just approaching the house where lived Mrs. and Miss Bates.She determined to call upon them and seek safety in numbers. There wasalways sufficient reason for such an attention; Mrs. and Miss Batesloved to be called on, and she knew she was considered by the very fewwho presumed ever to see imperfection in her, as rather negligent inthat respect, and as not contributing what she ought to the stock oftheir scanty comforts.She had had many a hint from Mr. Knightley and some from her own heart,as to her deficiency--but none were equal to counteract the persuasionof its being very disagreeable,--a waste of time--tiresome women--andall the horror of being in danger of falling in with the second-rate andthird-rate of Highbury, who were calling on them for ever, and thereforeshe seldom went near them. But now she made the sudden resolution of notpassing their door without going in--observing, as she proposed it toHarriet, that, as well as she could calculate, they were just now quitesafe from any letter from Jane Fairfax.The house belonged to people in business. Mrs. and Miss Bates occupiedthe drawing-room floor; and there, in the very moderate-sized apartment,which was every thing to them, the visitors were most cordially and evengratefully welcomed; the quiet neat old lady, who with her knitting wasseated in the warmest corner, wanting even to give up her place toMiss Woodhouse, and her more active, talking daughter, almost readyto overpower them with care and kindness, thanks for their visit,solicitude for their shoes, anxious inquiries after Mr. Woodhouse'shealth, cheerful communications about her mother's, and sweet-cake fromthe beaufet--"Mrs. Cole had just been there, just called in for tenminutes, and had been so good as to sit an hour with them, and _she_ hadtaken a piece of cake and been so kind as to say she liked it very much;and, therefore, she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do themthe favour to eat a piece too]
 [The mention of the Coles was sure to be followed by that of Mr. Elton.There was intimacy between them, and Mr. Cole had heard from Mr. Eltonsince his going away. Emma knew what was coming; they must have theletter over again, and settle how long he had been gone, and how muchhe was engaged in company, and what a favourite he was wherever he went,and how full the Master of the Ceremonies' ball had been; and she wentthrough it very well, with all the interest and all the commendationthat could be requisite, and always putting forward to prevent Harriet'sbeing obliged to say a word.This she had been prepared for when she entered the house; but meant,having once talked him handsomely over, to be no farther incommoded byany troublesome topic, and to wander at large amongst all the Mistressesand Misses of Highbury, and their card-parties. She had not beenprepared to have Jane Fairfax succeed Mr. Elton; but he was actuallyhurried off by Miss Bates, she jumped away from him at last abruptly tothe Coles, to usher in a letter from her niece]
 [Oh! yes--Mr. Elton, I understand--certainly as to dancing--Mrs. Colewas telling me that dancing at the rooms at Bath was--Mrs. Cole was sokind as to sit some time with us, talking of Jane; for as soon asshe came in, she began inquiring after her, Jane is so very great afavourite there. Whenever she is with us, Mrs. Cole does not know how toshew her kindness enough; and I must say that Jane deserves it as muchas any body can. And so she began inquiring after her directly, saying,'I know you cannot have heard from Jane lately, because it is not hertime for writing;' and when I immediately said, 'But indeed we have, wehad a letter this very morning,' I do not know that I ever saw any bodymore surprized. 'Have you, upon your honour?' said she; 'well, that isquite unexpected. Do let me hear what she says]
 ["Emma's politeness was at hand directly, to say, with smiling interest--"Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately? I am extremely happy. Ihope she is well?""Thank you. You are so kind!" replied the happily deceived aunt, whileeagerly hunting for the letter.--"Oh! here it is. I was sure it couldnot be far off; but I had put my huswife upon it, you see, without beingaware, and so it was quite hid, but I had it in my hand so very latelythat I was almost sure it must be on the table. I was reading it to Mrs.Cole, and since she went away, I was reading it again to my mother, forit is such a pleasure to her--a letter from Jane--that she can neverhear it often enough; so I knew it could not be far off, and here it is,only just under my huswife--and since you are so kind as to wish to hearwhat she says;--but, first of all, I really must, in justice toJane, apologise for her writing so short a letter--only two pages yousee--hardly two--and in general she fills the whole paper and crosseshalf. My mother often wonders that I can make it out so well. She oftensays, when the letter is first opened, 'Well, Hetty, now I thinkyou will be put to it to make out all that checker-work'--don't you,ma'am?--And then I tell her, I am sure she would contrive to make it outherself, if she had nobody to do it for her--every word of it--I am sureshe would pore over it till she had made out every word. And, indeed,though my mother's eyes are not so good as they were, she can seeamazingly well still, thank God! with the help of spectacles. It is sucha blessing! My mother's are really very good indeed. Jane often says,when she is here, 'I am sure, grandmama, you must have had very strongeyes to see as you do--and so much fine work as you have done too!--Ionly wish my eyes may last me as well]
 ["All this spoken extremely fast obliged Miss Bates to stop for breath;and Emma said something very civil about the excellence of MissFairfax's handwriting]
 [You are extremely kind," replied Miss Bates, highly gratified; "you whoare such a judge, and write so beautifully yourself. I am sure there isnobody's praise that could give us so much pleasure as Miss Woodhouse's.My mother does not hear; she is a little deaf you know. Ma'am,"addressing her, "do you hear what Miss Woodhouse is so obliging to sayabout Jane's handwriting?"And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly compliment repeatedtwice over before the good old lady could comprehend it. She waspondering, in the meanwhile, upon the possibility, without seeming veryrude, of making her escape from Jane Fairfax's letter, and had almostresolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excuse, when MissBates turned to her again and seized her attention]
 [My mother's deafness is very trifling you see--just nothing at all. Byonly raising my voice, and saying any thing two or three times over,she is sure to hear; but then she is used to my voice. But it is veryremarkable that she should always hear Jane better than she does me.Jane speaks so distinct! However, she will not find her grandmama at alldeafer than she was two years ago; which is saying a great deal at mymother's time of life--and it really is full two years, you know, sinceshe was here. We never were so long without seeing her before, and asI was telling Mrs. Cole, we shall hardly know how to make enough of hernow]
 ["Are you expecting Miss Fairfax here soon?""Oh yes; next week]
 ["Indeed!--that must be a very great pleasure]
 ["Thank you. You are very kind. Yes, next week. Every body is sosurprized; and every body says the same obliging things. I am sure shewill be as happy to see her friends at Highbury, as they can be to seeher. Yes, Friday or Saturday; she cannot say which, because ColonelCampbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days. So verygood of them to send her the whole way! But they always do, you know. Ohyes, Friday or Saturday next. That is what she writes about. That isthe reason of her writing out of rule, as we call it; for, in thecommon course, we should not have heard from her before next Tuesday orWednesday]
 ["Yes, so I imagined. I was afraid there could be little chance of myhearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to-day]
 ["So obliging of you! No, we should not have heard, if it had not beenfor this particular circumstance, of her being to come here so soon. Mymother is so delighted!--for she is to be three months with us atleast. Three months, she says so, positively, as I am going to have thepleasure of reading to you. The case is, you see, that the Campbells aregoing to Ireland. Mrs. Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to comeover and see her directly. They had not intended to go over till thesummer, but she is so impatient to see them again--for till she married,last October, she was never away from them so much as a week, which mustmake it very strange to be in different kingdoms, I was going to say,but however different countries, and so she wrote a very urgent letterto her mother--or her father, I declare I do not know which it was, butwe shall see presently in Jane's letter--wrote in Mr. Dixon's name aswell as her own, to press their coming over directly, and they wouldgive them the meeting in Dublin, and take them back to their countryseat, Baly-craig, a beautiful place, I fancy. Jane has heard a greatdeal of its beauty; from Mr. Dixon, I mean--I do not know that she everheard about it from any body else; but it was very natural, you know,that he should like to speak of his own place while he was paying hisaddresses--and as Jane used to be very often walking out with them--forColonel and Mrs. Campbell were very particular about their daughter'snot walking out often with only Mr. Dixon, for which I do not at allblame them; of course she heard every thing he might be telling MissCampbell about his own home in Ireland; and I think she wrote us wordthat he had shewn them some drawings of the place, views that he hadtaken himself. He is a most amiable, charming young man, I believe. Janewas quite longing to go to Ireland, from his account of things]
 [At this moment, an ingenious and animating suspicion entering Emma'sbrain with regard to Jane Fairfax, this charming Mr. Dixon, and thenot going to Ireland, she said, with the insidious design of fartherdiscovery,"You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allowed tocome to you at such a time. Considering the very particular friendshipbetween her and Mrs. Dixon, you could hardly have expected her to beexcused from accompanying Colonel and Mrs. Campbell]
 ["Very true, very true, indeed. The very thing that we have always beenrather afraid of; for we should not have liked to have her at such adistance from us, for months together--not able to come if any thing wasto happen. But you see, every thing turns out for the best. They wanther (Mr. and Mrs. Dixon) excessively to come over with Colonel and Mrs.Campbell; quite depend upon it; nothing can be more kind or pressingthan their _joint_ invitation, Jane says, as you will hear presently;Mr. Dixon does not seem in the least backward in any attention. He isa most charming young man. Ever since the service he rendered Jane atWeymouth, when they were out in that party on the water, and she, by thesudden whirling round of something or other among the sails, would havebeen dashed into the sea at once, and actually was all but gone, if hehad not, with the greatest presence of mind, caught hold of her habit--(I can never think of it without trembling!)--But ever since we had thehistory of that day, I have been so fond of Mr. Dixon!""But, in spite of all her friends' urgency, and her own wish of seeingIreland, Miss Fairfax prefers devoting the time to you and Mrs. Bates?""Yes--entirely her own doing, entirely her own choice; and Coloneland Mrs. Campbell think she does quite right, just what they shouldrecommend; and indeed they particularly _wish_ her to try her nativeair, as she has not been quite so well as usual lately]
 ["I am concerned to hear of it. I think they judge wisely. But Mrs.Dixon must be very much disappointed. Mrs. Dixon, I understand, hasno remarkable degree of personal beauty; is not, by any means, to becompared with Miss Fairfax]
 ["Oh! no. You are very obliging to say such things--but certainly not.There is no comparison between them. Miss Campbell always was absolutelyplain--but extremely elegant and amiable]
 ["Yes, that of course]
 ["Jane caught a bad cold, poor thing! so long ago as the 7th of November,(as I am going to read to you,) and has never been well since. A longtime, is not it, for a cold to hang upon her? She never mentionedit before, because she would not alarm us. Just like her! soconsiderate!--But however, she is so far from well, that her kindfriends the Campbells think she had better come home, and try an airthat always agrees with her; and they have no doubt that three or fourmonths at Highbury will entirely cure her--and it is certainly a greatdeal better that she should come here, than go to Ireland, if she isunwell. Nobody could nurse her, as we should do]
 ["It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world]
 ["And so she is to come to us next Friday or Saturday, and the Campbellsleave town in their way to Holyhead the Monday following--as you willfind from Jane's letter. So sudden!--You may guess, dear Miss Woodhouse,what a flurry it has thrown me in! If it was not for the drawback ofher illness--but I am afraid we must expect to see her grown thin, andlooking very poorly. I must tell you what an unlucky thing happened tome, as to that. I always make a point of reading Jane's letters throughto myself first, before I read them aloud to my mother, you know, forfear of there being any thing in them to distress her. Jane desired meto do it, so I always do: and so I began to-day with my usual caution;but no sooner did I come to the mention of her being unwell, than Iburst out, quite frightened, with 'Bless me! poor Jane is ill!'--whichmy mother, being on the watch, heard distinctly, and was sadly alarmedat. However, when I read on, I found it was not near so bad as I hadfancied at first; and I make so light of it now to her, that she doesnot think much about it. But I cannot imagine how I could be so off myguard. If Jane does not get well soon, we will call in Mr. Perry. Theexpense shall not be thought of; and though he is so liberal, and sofond of Jane that I dare say he would not mean to charge any thing forattendance, we could not suffer it to be so, you know. He has a wife andfamily to maintain, and is not to be giving away his time. Well, now Ihave just given you a hint of what Jane writes about, we will turn toher letter, and I am sure she tells her own story a great deal betterthan I can tell it for her]
 ["I am afraid we must be running away," said Emma, glancing at Harriet,and beginning to rise--"My father will be expecting us. I had nointention, I thought I had no power of staying more than five minutes,when I first entered the house. I merely called, because I would notpass the door without inquiring after Mrs. Bates; but I have been sopleasantly detained! Now, however, we must wish you and Mrs. Bates goodmorning]
 [And not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded. She regainedthe street--happy in this, that though much had been forced on heragainst her will, though she had in fact heard the whole substance ofJane Fairfax's letter, she had been able to escape the letter itself.CHAPTER IIJane Fairfax was an orphan, the only child of Mrs. Bates's youngestdaughter.The marriage of Lieut. Fairfax of the ----regiment of infantry,and Miss Jane Bates, had had its day of fame and pleasure, hopeand interest; but nothing now remained of it, save the melancholyremembrance of him dying in action abroad--of his widow sinking underconsumption and grief soon afterwards--and this girl.By birth she belonged to Highbury: and when at three years old, onlosing her mother, she became the property, the charge, the consolation,the foundling of her grandmother and aunt, there had seemed everyprobability of her being permanently fixed there; of her being taughtonly what very limited means could command, and growing up with noadvantages of connexion or improvement, to be engrafted on whatnature had given her in a pleasing person, good understanding, andwarm-hearted, well-meaning relations.But the compassionate feelings of a friend of her father gave a changeto her destiny. This was Colonel Campbell, who had very highly regardedFairfax, as an excellent officer and most deserving young man; andfarther, had been indebted to him for such attentions, during a severecamp-fever, as he believed had saved his life. These were claims whichhe did not learn to overlook, though some years passed away from thedeath of poor Fairfax, before his own return to England put any thing inhis power. When he did return, he sought out the child and took noticeof her. He was a married man, with only one living child, a girl, aboutJane's age: and Jane became their guest, paying them long visits andgrowing a favourite with all; and before she was nine years old, hisdaughter's great fondness for her, and his own wish of being a realfriend, united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of undertakingthe whole charge of her education. It was accepted; and from that periodJane had belonged to Colonel Campbell's family, and had lived with thementirely, only visiting her grandmother from time to time.The plan was that she should be brought up for educating others; thevery few hundred pounds which she inherited from her father makingindependence impossible. To provide for her otherwise was out of ColonelCampbell's power; for though his income, by pay and appointments, washandsome, his fortune was moderate and must be all his daughter's;but, by giving her an education, he hoped to be supplying the means ofrespectable subsistence hereafter.Such was Jane Fairfax's history. She had fallen into good hands, knownnothing but kindness from the Campbells, and been given an excellenteducation. Living constantly with right-minded and well-informed people,her heart and understanding had received every advantage of disciplineand culture; and Colonel Campbell's residence being in London, everylighter talent had been done full justice to, by the attendance offirst-rate masters. Her disposition and abilities were equally worthyof all that friendship could do; and at eighteen or nineteen she was,as far as such an early age can be qualified for the care of children,fully competent to the office of instruction herself; but she was toomuch beloved to be parted with. Neither father nor mother could promote,and the daughter could not endure it. The evil day was put off. It waseasy to decide that she was still too young; and Jane remained withthem, sharing, as another daughter, in all the rational pleasures ofan elegant society, and a judicious mixture of home and amusement, withonly the drawback of the future, the sobering suggestions of her owngood understanding to remind her that all this might soon be over.The affection of the whole family, the warm attachment of MissCampbell in particular, was the more honourable to each party fromthe circumstance of Jane's decided superiority both in beauty andacquirements. That nature had given it in feature could not be unseenby the young woman, nor could her higher powers of mind be unfelt by theparents. They continued together with unabated regard however, till themarriage of Miss Campbell, who by that chance, that luck which so oftendefies anticipation in matrimonial affairs, giving attraction to what ismoderate rather than to what is superior, engaged the affections ofMr. Dixon, a young man, rich and agreeable, almost as soon as they wereacquainted; and was eligibly and happily settled, while Jane Fairfax hadyet her bread to earn.This event had very lately taken place; too lately for any thing to beyet attempted by her less fortunate friend towards entering on her pathof duty; though she had now reached the age which her own judgment hadfixed on for beginning. She had long resolved that one-and-twentyshould be the period. With the fortitude of a devoted novitiate, she hadresolved at one-and-twenty to complete the sacrifice, and retire fromall the pleasures of life, of rational intercourse, equal society, peaceand hope, to penance and mortification for ever.The good sense of Colonel and Mrs. Campbell could not oppose sucha resolution, though their feelings did. As long as they lived, noexertions would be necessary, their home might be hers for ever; and fortheir own comfort they would have retained her wholly; but this wouldbe selfishness:--what must be at last, had better be soon. Perhaps theybegan to feel it might have been kinder and wiser to have resisted thetemptation of any delay, and spared her from a taste of such enjoymentsof ease and leisure as must now be relinquished. Still, however,affection was glad to catch at any reasonable excuse for not hurryingon the wretched moment. She had never been quite well since the time oftheir daughter's marriage; and till she should have completely recoveredher usual strength, they must forbid her engaging in duties, which, sofar from being compatible with a weakened frame and varying spirits,seemed, under the most favourable circumstances, to require somethingmore than human perfection of body and mind to be discharged withtolerable comfort.With regard to her not accompanying them to Ireland, her account to heraunt contained nothing but truth, though there might be some truthsnot told. It was her own choice to give the time of their absence toHighbury; to spend, perhaps, her last months of perfect liberty withthose kind relations to whom she was so very dear: and the Campbells,whatever might be their motive or motives, whether single, or double, ortreble, gave the arrangement their ready sanction, and said, that theydepended more on a few months spent in her native air, for the recoveryof her health, than on any thing else. Certain it was that she was tocome; and that Highbury, instead of welcoming that perfect novelty whichhad been so long promised it--Mr. Frank Churchill--must put up for thepresent with Jane Fairfax, who could bring only the freshness of a twoyears' absence.Emma was sorry;--to have to pay civilities to a person she did not likethrough three long months!--to be always doing more than she wished,and less than she ought! Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be adifficult question to answer; Mr. Knightley had once told her it wasbecause she saw in her the really accomplished young woman, which shewanted to be thought herself; and though the accusation had been eagerlyrefuted at the time, there were moments of self-examination in whichher conscience could not quite acquit her. But "she could never getacquainted with her: she did not know how it was, but there was suchcoldness and reserve--such apparent indifference whether she pleased ornot--and then, her aunt was such an eternal talker!--and she was madesuch a fuss with by every body!--and it had been always imagined thatthey were to be so intimate--because their ages were the same, everybody had supposed they must be so fond of each other]
 [ These were herreasons--she had no better.It was a dislike so little just--every imputed fault was so magnifiedby fancy, that she never saw Jane Fairfax the first time after anyconsiderable absence, without feeling that she had injured her; andnow, when the due visit was paid, on her arrival, after a two years'interval, she was particularly struck with the very appearance andmanners, which for those two whole years she had been depreciating. JaneFairfax was very elegant, remarkably elegant; and she had herself thehighest value for elegance. Her height was pretty, just such as almostevery body would think tall, and nobody could think very tall; herfigure particularly graceful; her size a most becoming medium, betweenfat and thin, though a slight appearance of ill-health seemed to pointout the likeliest evil of the two. Emma could not but feel all this; andthen, her face--her features--there was more beauty in them altogetherthan she had remembered; it was not regular, but it was very pleasingbeauty. Her eyes, a deep grey, with dark eye-lashes and eyebrows, hadnever been denied their praise; but the skin, which she had been used tocavil at, as wanting colour, had a clearness and delicacy which reallyneeded no fuller bloom. It was a style of beauty, of which elegance wasthe reigning character, and as such, she must, in honour, by all herprinciples, admire it:--elegance, which, whether of person or of mind,she saw so little in Highbury. There, not to be vulgar, was distinction,and merit.In short, she sat, during the first visit, looking at Jane Fairfax withtwofold complacency; the sense of pleasure and the sense of renderingjustice, and was determining that she would dislike her no longer. Whenshe took in her history, indeed, her situation, as well as her beauty;when she considered what all this elegance was destined to, what she wasgoing to sink from, how she was going to live, it seemed impossibleto feel any thing but compassion and respect; especially, if to everywell-known particular entitling her to interest, were added the highlyprobable circumstance of an attachment to Mr. Dixon, which she hadso naturally started to herself. In that case, nothing could be morepitiable or more honourable than the sacrifices she had resolved on.Emma was very willing now to acquit her of having seduced Mr. Dixon'sactions from his wife, or of any thing mischievous which her imaginationhad suggested at first. If it were love, it might be simple, single,successless love on her side alone. She might have been unconsciouslysucking in the sad poison, while a sharer of his conversation with herfriend; and from the best, the purest of motives, might now bedenying herself this visit to Ireland, and resolving to divide herselfeffectually from him and his connexions by soon beginning her career oflaborious duty.Upon the whole, Emma left her with such softened, charitable feelings,as made her look around in walking home, and lament that Highburyafforded no young man worthy of giving her independence; nobody that shecould wish to scheme about for her.These were charming feelings--but not lasting. Before she had committedherself by any public profession of eternal friendship for Jane Fairfax,or done more towards a recantation of past prejudices and errors, thansaying to Mr. Knightley, "She certainly is handsome; she is better thanhandsome!" Jane had spent an evening at Hartfield with her grandmotherand aunt, and every thing was relapsing much into its usual state.Former provocations reappeared. The aunt was as tiresome as ever; moretiresome, because anxiety for her health was now added to admirationof her powers; and they had to listen to the description of exactly howlittle bread and butter she ate for breakfast, and how small a sliceof mutton for dinner, as well as to see exhibitions of new caps and newworkbags for her mother and herself; and Jane's offences rose again.They had music; Emma was obliged to play; and the thanks and praisewhich necessarily followed appeared to her an affectation of candour, anair of greatness, meaning only to shew off in higher style her own verysuperior performance. She was, besides, which was the worst of all, socold, so cautious! There was no getting at her real opinion. Wrapt up ina cloak of politeness, she seemed determined to hazard nothing. She wasdisgustingly, was suspiciously reserved.If any thing could be more, where all was most, she was more reserved onthe subject of Weymouth and the Dixons than any thing. She seemed benton giving no real insight into Mr. Dixon's character, or her own valuefor his company, or opinion of the suitableness of the match. It was allgeneral approbation and smoothness; nothing delineated or distinguished.It did her no service however. Her caution was thrown away. Emma sawits artifice, and returned to her first surmises. There probably _was_something more to conceal than her own preference; Mr. Dixon, perhaps,had been very near changing one friend for the other, or been fixed onlyto Miss Campbell, for the sake of the future twelve thousand pounds.The like reserve prevailed on other topics. She and Mr. Frank Churchillhad been at Weymouth at the same time. It was known that they were alittle acquainted; but not a syllable of real information could Emmaprocure as to what he truly was. "Was he handsome?"--"She believedhe was reckoned a very fine young man]
 [ "Was he agreeable?"--"He wasgenerally thought so]
 [ "Did he appear a sensible young man; a youngman of information?"--"At a watering-place, or in a common Londonacquaintance, it was difficult to decide on such points. Manners wereall that could be safely judged of, under a much longer knowledge thanthey had yet had of Mr. Churchill. She believed every body found hismanners pleasing]
 [ Emma could not forgive her.CHAPTER IIIEmma could not forgive her;--but as neither provocation nor resentmentwere discerned by Mr. Knightley, who had been of the party, and hadseen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side, he wasexpressing the next morning, being at Hartfield again on business withMr. Woodhouse, his approbation of the whole; not so openly as he mighthave done had her father been out of the room, but speaking plain enoughto be very intelligible to Emma. He had been used to think her unjust toJane, and had now great pleasure in marking an improvement]
 [A very pleasant evening," he began, as soon as Mr. Woodhouse had beentalked into what was necessary, told that he understood, and the papersswept away;--"particularly pleasant. You and Miss Fairfax gave us somevery good music. I do not know a more luxurious state, sir, than sittingat one's ease to be entertained a whole evening by two such young women;sometimes with music and sometimes with conversation. I am sure MissFairfax must have found the evening pleasant, Emma. You left nothingundone. I was glad you made her play so much, for having no instrumentat her grandmother's, it must have been a real indulgence]
 ["I am happy you approved," said Emma, smiling; "but I hope I am notoften deficient in what is due to guests at Hartfield]
 ["No, my dear," said her father instantly; "_that_ I am sure you are not.There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are. If any thing,you are too attentive. The muffin last night--if it had been handedround once, I think it would have been enough]
 ["No," said Mr. Knightley, nearly at the same time; "you are not oftendeficient; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension. Ithink you understand me, therefore]
 [An arch look expressed--"I understand you well enough;" but she saidonly, "Miss Fairfax is reserved]
 ["I always told you she was--a little; but you will soon overcome allthat part of her reserve which ought to be overcome, all that has itsfoundation in diffidence. What arises from discretion must be honoured]
 ["You think her diffident. I do not see it]
 ["My dear Emma," said he, moving from his chair into one close by her,"you are not going to tell me, I hope, that you had not a pleasantevening]
 ["Oh! no; I was pleased with my own perseverance in asking questions; andamused to think how little information I obtained]
 ["I am disappointed," was his only answer]
 [I hope every body had a pleasant evening," said Mr. Woodhouse, in hisquiet way. "I had. Once, I felt the fire rather too much; but then Imoved back my chair a little, a very little, and it did not disturb me.Miss Bates was very chatty and good-humoured, as she always is, thoughshe speaks rather too quick. However, she is very agreeable, and Mrs.Bates too, in a different way. I like old friends; and Miss JaneFairfax is a very pretty sort of young lady, a very pretty and avery well-behaved young lady indeed. She must have found the eveningagreeable, Mr. Knightley, because she had Emma]
 ["True, sir; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax]
 [Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least for thepresent, said, and with a sincerity which no one could question--"She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one's eyes from.I am always watching her to admire; and I do pity her from my heart]
 [Mr. Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared toexpress; and before he could make any reply, Mr. Woodhouse, whosethoughts were on the Bates's, said--"It is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confined! agreat pity indeed! and I have often wished--but it is so little one canventure to do--small, trifling presents, of any thing uncommon--Now wehave killed a porker, and Emma thinks of sending them a loin or a leg;it is very small and delicate--Hartfield pork is not like any otherpork--but still it is pork--and, my dear Emma, unless one could be sureof their making it into steaks, nicely fried, as ours are fried, withoutthe smallest grease, and not roast it, for no stomach can bear roastpork--I think we had better send the leg--do not you think so, my dear?""My dear papa, I sent the whole hind-quarter. I knew you would wish it.There will be the leg to be salted, you know, which is so very nice, andthe loin to be dressed directly in any manner they like]
 ["That's right, my dear, very right. I had not thought of it before, butthat is the best way. They must not over-salt the leg; and then, if itis not over-salted, and if it is very thoroughly boiled, just as Serleboils ours, and eaten very moderately of, with a boiled turnip, and alittle carrot or parsnip, I do not consider it unwholesome]
 ["Emma," said Mr. Knightley presently, "I have a piece of news for you.You like news--and I heard an article in my way hither that I think willinterest you]
 ["News! Oh! yes, I always like news. What is it?--why do you smileso?--where did you hear it?--at Randalls?"He had time only to say,"No, not at Randalls; I have not been near Randalls," when the door wasthrown open, and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room. Fullof thanks, and full of news, Miss Bates knew not which to give quickest.Mr. Knightley soon saw that he had lost his moment, and that not anothersyllable of communication could rest with him]
 [Oh! my dear sir, how are you this morning? My dear Miss Woodhouse--Icome quite over-powered. Such a beautiful hind-quarter of pork! Youare too bountiful! Have you heard the news? Mr. Elton is going to bemarried]
 [Emma had not had time even to think of Mr. Elton, and she was socompletely surprized that she could not avoid a little start, and alittle blush, at the sound]
 [There is my news:--I thought it would interest you," said Mr.Knightley, with a smile which implied a conviction of some part of whathad passed between them]
 [But where could _you_ hear it?" cried Miss Bates. "Where could youpossibly hear it, Mr. Knightley? For it is not five minutes since Ireceived Mrs. Cole's note--no, it cannot be more than five--or at leastten--for I had got my bonnet and spencer on, just ready to come out--Iwas only gone down to speak to Patty again about the pork--Jane wasstanding in the passage--were not you, Jane?--for my mother was soafraid that we had not any salting-pan large enough. So I said I wouldgo down and see, and Jane said, 'Shall I go down instead? for I thinkyou have a little cold, and Patty has been washing the kitchen]
 [--'Oh!my dear,' said I--well, and just then came the note. A MissHawkins--that's all I know. A Miss Hawkins of Bath. But, Mr. Knightley,how could you possibly have heard it? for the very moment Mr. Cole toldMrs. Cole of it, she sat down and wrote to me. A Miss Hawkins--""I was with Mr. Cole on business an hour and a half ago. He had justread Elton's letter as I was shewn in, and handed it to me directly]
 ["Well! that is quite--I suppose there never was a piece of news moregenerally interesting. My dear sir, you really are too bountiful. Mymother desires her very best compliments and regards, and a thousandthanks, and says you really quite oppress her]
 ["We consider our Hartfield pork," replied Mr. Woodhouse--"indeed itcertainly is, so very superior to all other pork, that Emma and I cannothave a greater pleasure than--""Oh! my dear sir, as my mother says, our friends are only too goodto us. If ever there were people who, without having great wealththemselves, had every thing they could wish for, I am sure it is us.We may well say that 'our lot is cast in a goodly heritage]
 [ Well, Mr.Knightley, and so you actually saw the letter; well--""It was short--merely to announce--but cheerful, exulting, of course]
 [--Here was a sly glance at Emma. "He had been so fortunate as to--I forgetthe precise words--one has no business to remember them. The informationwas, as you state, that he was going to be married to a Miss Hawkins. Byhis style, I should imagine it just settled]
 ["Mr. Elton going to be married!" said Emma, as soon as she could speak]
 [He will have every body's wishes for his happiness]
 ["He is very young to settle," was Mr. Woodhouse's observation. "He hadbetter not be in a hurry. He seemed to me very well off as he was. Wewere always glad to see him at Hartfield]
 ["A new neighbour for us all, Miss Woodhouse!" said Miss Bates, joyfully;"my mother is so pleased!--she says she cannot bear to have the poor oldVicarage without a mistress. This is great news, indeed. Jane, you havenever seen Mr. Elton!--no wonder that you have such a curiosity to seehim]
 [Jane's curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly tooccupy her]
 [No--I have never seen Mr. Elton," she replied, starting on this appeal;"is he--is he a tall man?""Who shall answer that question?" cried Emma. "My father would say'yes,' Mr. Knightley 'no;' and Miss Bates and I that he is just thehappy medium. When you have been here a little longer, Miss Fairfax,you will understand that Mr. Elton is the standard of perfection inHighbury, both in person and mind]
 ["Very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will. He is the very best youngman--But, my dear Jane, if you remember, I told you yesterday hewas precisely the height of Mr. Perry. Miss Hawkins,--I dare say, anexcellent young woman. His extreme attention to my mother--wantingher to sit in the vicarage pew, that she might hear the better, for mymother is a little deaf, you know--it is not much, but she does nothear quite quick. Jane says that Colonel Campbell is a little deaf. Hefancied bathing might be good for it--the warm bath--but she says it didhim no lasting benefit. Colonel Campbell, you know, is quite our angel.And Mr. Dixon seems a very charming young man, quite worthy of him. Itis such a happiness when good people get together--and they always do.Now, here will be Mr. Elton and Miss Hawkins; and there are the Coles,such very good people; and the Perrys--I suppose there never was ahappier or a better couple than Mr. and Mrs. Perry. I say, sir," turningto Mr. Woodhouse, "I think there are few places with such society asHighbury. I always say, we are quite blessed in our neighbours.--My dearsir, if there is one thing my mother loves better than another, it ispork--a roast loin of pork--""As to who, or what Miss Hawkins is, or how long he has been acquaintedwith her," said Emma, "nothing I suppose can be known. One feels that itcannot be a very long acquaintance. He has been gone only four weeks]
 [Nobody had any information to give; and, after a few more wonderings,Emma said,"You are silent, Miss Fairfax--but I hope you mean to take an interestin this news. You, who have been hearing and seeing so much of lateon these subjects, who must have been so deep in the business on MissCampbell's account--we shall not excuse your being indifferent about Mr.Elton and Miss Hawkins]
 ["When I have seen Mr. Elton," replied Jane, "I dare say I shall beinterested--but I believe it requires _that_ with me. And as it is somemonths since Miss Campbell married, the impression may be a little wornoff]
 ["Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you observe, Miss Woodhouse,"said Miss Bates, "four weeks yesterday.--A Miss Hawkins!--Well, I hadalways rather fancied it would be some young lady hereabouts; not thatI ever--Mrs. Cole once whispered to me--but I immediately said, 'No, Mr.Elton is a most worthy young man--but'--In short, I do not think I amparticularly quick at those sort of discoveries. I do not pretend to it.What is before me, I see. At the same time, nobody could wonder ifMr. Elton should have aspired--Miss Woodhouse lets me chatter on, sogood-humouredly. She knows I would not offend for the world. How doesMiss Smith do? She seems quite recovered now. Have you heard from Mrs.John Knightley lately? Oh! those dear little children. Jane, do youknow I always fancy Mr. Dixon like Mr. John Knightley. I mean inperson--tall, and with that sort of look--and not very talkative]
 ["Quite wrong, my dear aunt; there is no likeness at all]
 ["Very odd! but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand.One takes up a notion, and runs away with it. Mr. Dixon, you say, isnot, strictly speaking, handsome?""Handsome! Oh! no--far from it--certainly plain. I told you he wasplain]
 ["My dear, you said that Miss Campbell would not allow him to be plain,and that you yourself--""Oh! as for me, my judgment is worth nothing. Where I have a regard,I always think a person well-looking. But I gave what I believed thegeneral opinion, when I called him plain]
 ["Well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be running away. The weather doesnot look well, and grandmama will be uneasy. You are too obliging, mydear Miss Woodhouse; but we really must take leave. This has been a mostagreeable piece of news indeed. I shall just go round by Mrs. Cole's;but I shall not stop three minutes: and, Jane, you had better go homedirectly--I would not have you out in a shower!--We think she is thebetter for Highbury already. Thank you, we do indeed. I shall notattempt calling on Mrs. Goddard, for I really do not think she cares forany thing but _boiled_ pork: when we dress the leg it will be anotherthing. Good morning to you, my dear sir. Oh! Mr. Knightley is comingtoo. Well, that is so very!--I am sure if Jane is tired, you will beso kind as to give her your arm.--Mr. Elton, and Miss Hawkins!--Goodmorning to you]
 [Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted by him whilehe lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry--and tomarry strangers too--and the other half she could give to her own viewof the subject. It was to herself an amusing and a very welcome pieceof news, as proving that Mr. Elton could not have suffered long; but shewas sorry for Harriet: Harriet must feel it--and all that she could hopewas, by giving the first information herself, to save her from hearingit abruptly from others. It was now about the time that she was likelyto call. If she were to meet Miss Bates in her way!--and upon itsbeginning to rain, Emma was obliged to expect that the weather wouldbe detaining her at Mrs. Goddard's, and that the intelligence wouldundoubtedly rush upon her without preparation.The shower was heavy, but short; and it had not been over five minutes,when in came Harriet, with just the heated, agitated look whichhurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give; and the "Oh! MissWoodhouse, what do you think has happened!" which instantly burst forth,had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation. As the blow wasgiven, Emma felt that she could not now shew greater kindness than inlistening; and Harriet, unchecked, ran eagerly through what she had totell. "She had set out from Mrs. Goddard's half an hour ago--she hadbeen afraid it would rain--she had been afraid it would pour downevery moment--but she thought she might get to Hartfield first--shehad hurried on as fast as possible; but then, as she was passing by thehouse where a young woman was making up a gown for her, she thought shewould just step in and see how it went on; and though she did not seemto stay half a moment there, soon after she came out it began to rain,and she did not know what to do; so she ran on directly, as fast asshe could, and took shelter at Ford's]
 [--Ford's was the principalwoollen-draper, linen-draper, and haberdasher's shop united; the shopfirst in size and fashion in the place.--"And so, there she hadset, without an idea of any thing in the world, full ten minutes,perhaps--when, all of a sudden, who should come in--to be sure it wasso very odd!--but they always dealt at Ford's--who should come in, butElizabeth Martin and her brother!--Dear Miss Woodhouse! only think. Ithought I should have fainted. I did not know what to do. I was sittingnear the door--Elizabeth saw me directly; but he did not; he was busywith the umbrella. I am sure she saw me, but she looked away directly,and took no notice; and they both went to quite the farther end of theshop; and I kept sitting near the door!--Oh! dear; I was so miserable!I am sure I must have been as white as my gown. I could not go awayyou know, because of the rain; but I did so wish myself anywhere in theworld but there.--Oh! dear, Miss Woodhouse--well, at last, I fancy, helooked round and saw me; for instead of going on with her buyings, theybegan whispering to one another. I am sure they were talking of me; andI could not help thinking that he was persuading her to speak to me--(doyou think he was, Miss Woodhouse?)--for presently she came forward--camequite up to me, and asked me how I did, and seemed ready to shake hands,if I would. She did not do any of it in the same way that she used; Icould see she was altered; but, however, she seemed to _try_ to be veryfriendly, and we shook hands, and stood talking some time; but I know nomore what I said--I was in such a tremble!--I remember she said shewas sorry we never met now; which I thought almost too kind! Dear, MissWoodhouse, I was absolutely miserable! By that time, it was beginning tohold up, and I was determined that nothing should stop me from gettingaway--and then--only think!--I found he was coming up towards metoo--slowly you know, and as if he did not quite know what to do; andso he came and spoke, and I answered--and I stood for a minute, feelingdreadfully, you know, one can't tell how; and then I took courage, andsaid it did not rain, and I must go; and so off I set; and I had not gotthree yards from the door, when he came after me, only to say, if I wasgoing to Hartfield, he thought I had much better go round by Mr. Cole'sstables, for I should find the near way quite floated by this rain. Oh!dear, I thought it would have been the death of me! So I said, I wasvery much obliged to him: you know I could not do less; and then he wentback to Elizabeth, and I came round by the stables--I believe I did--butI hardly knew where I was, or any thing about it. Oh! Miss Woodhouse,I would rather done any thing than have it happen: and yet, you know,there was a sort of satisfaction in seeing him behave so pleasantly andso kindly. And Elizabeth, too. Oh! Miss Woodhouse, do talk to me andmake me comfortable again]
 [Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately inher power. She was obliged to stop and think. She was not thoroughlycomfortable herself. The young man's conduct, and his sister's, seemedthe result of real feeling, and she could not but pity them. As Harrietdescribed it, there had been an interesting mixture of wounded affectionand genuine delicacy in their behaviour. But she had believed them to bewell-meaning, worthy people before; and what difference did this makein the evils of the connexion? It was folly to be disturbed by it. Ofcourse, he must be sorry to lose her--they must be all sorry. Ambition,as well as love, had probably been mortified. They might all have hopedto rise by Harriet's acquaintance: and besides, what was the value ofHarriet's description?--So easily pleased--so little discerning;--whatsignified her praise?She exerted herself, and did try to make her comfortable, by consideringall that had passed as a mere trifle, and quite unworthy of being dwelton,"It might be distressing, for the moment," said she; "but you seem tohave behaved extremely well; and it is over--and may never--can never,as a first meeting, occur again, and therefore you need not think aboutit]
 [Harriet said, "very true," and she "would not think about it;" but stillshe talked of it--still she could talk of nothing else; and Emma, atlast, in order to put the Martins out of her head, was obliged to hurryon the news, which she had meant to give with so much tender caution;hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angry, ashamed or onlyamused, at such a state of mind in poor Harriet--such a conclusion ofMr. Elton's importance with her!Mr. Elton's rights, however, gradually revived. Though she did not feelthe first intelligence as she might have done the day before, or an hourbefore, its interest soon increased; and before their first conversationwas over, she had talked herself into all the sensations of curiosity,wonder and regret, pain and pleasure, as to this fortunate Miss Hawkins,which could conduce to place the Martins under proper subordination inher fancy.Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting. Ithad been serviceable in deadening the first shock, without retaining anyinfluence to alarm. As Harriet now lived, the Martins could not getat her, without seeking her, where hitherto they had wanted either thecourage or the condescension to seek her; for since her refusal of thebrother, the sisters never had been at Mrs. Goddard's; and a twelvemonthmight pass without their being thrown together again, with anynecessity, or even any power of speech.CHAPTER IVHuman nature is so well disposed towards those who are in interestingsituations, that a young person, who either marries or dies, is sure ofbeing kindly spoken of.A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins's name was first mentioned inHighbury, before she was, by some means or other, discovered to haveevery recommendation of person and mind; to be handsome, elegant, highlyaccomplished, and perfectly amiable: and when Mr. Elton himself arrivedto triumph in his happy prospects, and circulate the fame of her merits,there was very little more for him to do, than to tell her Christianname, and say whose music she principally played.Mr. Elton returned, a very happy man. He had gone away rejected andmortified--disappointed in a very sanguine hope, after a series of whatappeared to him strong encouragement; and not only losing the rightlady, but finding himself debased to the level of a very wrong one. Hehad gone away deeply offended--he came back engaged to another--andto another as superior, of course, to the first, as under suchcircumstances what is gained always is to what is lost. He came back gayand self-satisfied, eager and busy, caring nothing for Miss Woodhouse,and defying Miss Smith.The charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all the usual advantages ofperfect beauty and merit, was in possession of an independent fortune,of so many thousands as would always be called ten; a point of somedignity, as well as some convenience: the story told well; he had notthrown himself away--he had gained a woman of 10,000 l. or thereabouts;and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity--the first hour ofintroduction had been so very soon followed by distinguishing notice;the history which he had to give Mrs. Cole of the rise and progressof the affair was so glorious--the steps so quick, from the accidentalrencontre, to the dinner at Mr. Green's, and the party at Mrs.Brown's--smiles and blushes rising in importance--with consciousness andagitation richly scattered--the lady had been so easily impressed--sosweetly disposed--had in short, to use a most intelligible phrase,been so very ready to have him, that vanity and prudence were equallycontented.He had caught both substance and shadow--both fortune and affection, andwas just the happy man he ought to be; talking only of himself andhis own concerns--expecting to be congratulated--ready to be laughedat--and, with cordial, fearless smiles, now addressing all the youngladies of the place, to whom, a few weeks ago, he would have been morecautiously gallant.The wedding was no distant event, as the parties had only themselves toplease, and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for; andwhen he set out for Bath again, there was a general expectation, whicha certain glance of Mrs. Cole's did not seem to contradict, that when henext entered Highbury he would bring his bride.During his present short stay, Emma had barely seen him; but just enoughto feel that the first meeting was over, and to give her the impressionof his not being improved by the mixture of pique and pretension, nowspread over his air. She was, in fact, beginning very much to wonderthat she had ever thought him pleasing at all; and his sight was soinseparably connected with some very disagreeable feelings, that,except in a moral light, as a penance, a lesson, a source of profitablehumiliation to her own mind, she would have been thankful to be assuredof never seeing him again. She wished him very well; but he gaveher pain, and his welfare twenty miles off would administer mostsatisfaction.The pain of his continued residence in Highbury, however, mustcertainly be lessened by his marriage. Many vain solicitudes would beprevented--many awkwardnesses smoothed by it. A _Mrs._ _Elton_ wouldbe an excuse for any change of intercourse; former intimacy might sinkwithout remark. It would be almost beginning their life of civilityagain.Of the lady, individually, Emma thought very little. She was good enoughfor Mr. Elton, no doubt; accomplished enough for Highbury--handsomeenough--to look plain, probably, by Harriet's side. As to connexion,there Emma was perfectly easy; persuaded, that after all his own vauntedclaims and disdain of Harriet, he had done nothing. On that article,truth seemed attainable. _What_ she was, must be uncertain; but _who_she was, might be found out; and setting aside the 10,000 l., it did notappear that she was at all Harriet's superior. She brought no name, noblood, no alliance. Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two daughtersof a Bristol--merchant, of course, he must be called; but, as the wholeof the profits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate, itwas not unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been verymoderate also. Part of every winter she had been used to spend in Bath;but Bristol was her home, the very heart of Bristol; for though thefather and mother had died some years ago, an uncle remained--in the lawline--nothing more distinctly honourable was hazarded of him, thanthat he was in the law line; and with him the daughter had lived. Emmaguessed him to be the drudge of some attorney, and too stupid to rise.And all the grandeur of the connexion seemed dependent on the eldersister, who was _very_ _well_ _married_, to a gentleman in a _great__way_, near Bristol, who kept two carriages! That was the wind-up of thehistory; that was the glory of Miss Hawkins.Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all! She hadtalked her into love; but, alas! she was not so easily to be talked outof it. The charm of an object to occupy the many vacancies of Harriet'smind was not to be talked away. He might be superseded by another; hecertainly would indeed; nothing could be clearer; even a Robert Martinwould have been sufficient; but nothing else, she feared, would cureher. Harriet was one of those, who, having once begun, would be alwaysin love. And now, poor girl! she was considerably worse from thisreappearance of Mr. Elton. She was always having a glimpse of himsomewhere or other. Emma saw him only once; but two or three times everyday Harriet was sure _just_ to meet with him, or _just_ to miss him,_just_ to hear his voice, or see his shoulder, _just_ to have somethingoccur to preserve him in her fancy, in all the favouring warmth ofsurprize and conjecture. She was, moreover, perpetually hearing abouthim; for, excepting when at Hartfield, she was always among those whosaw no fault in Mr. Elton, and found nothing so interesting asthe discussion of his concerns; and every report, therefore, everyguess--all that had already occurred, all that might occur in thearrangement of his affairs, comprehending income, servants, andfurniture, was continually in agitation around her. Her regard wasreceiving strength by invariable praise of him, and her regrets keptalive, and feelings irritated by ceaseless repetitions of MissHawkins's happiness, and continual observation of, how much he seemedattached!--his air as he walked by the house--the very sitting of hishat, being all in proof of how much he was in love!Had it been allowable entertainment, had there been no pain to herfriend, or reproach to herself, in the waverings of Harriet's mind,Emma would have been amused by its variations. Sometimes Mr. Eltonpredominated, sometimes the Martins; and each was occasionally usefulas a check to the other. Mr. Elton's engagement had been the cure ofthe agitation of meeting Mr. Martin. The unhappiness produced by theknowledge of that engagement had been a little put aside by ElizabethMartin's calling at Mrs. Goddard's a few days afterwards. Harriet hadnot been at home; but a note had been prepared and left for her, writtenin the very style to touch; a small mixture of reproach, with a greatdeal of kindness; and till Mr. Elton himself appeared, she had been muchoccupied by it, continually pondering over what could be done in return,and wishing to do more than she dared to confess. But Mr. Elton, inperson, had driven away all such cares. While he staid, the Martins wereforgotten; and on the very morning of his setting off for Bath again,Emma, to dissipate some of the distress it occasioned, judged it bestfor her to return Elizabeth Martin's visit.How that visit was to be acknowledged--what would be necessary--andwhat might be safest, had been a point of some doubtful consideration.Absolute neglect of the mother and sisters, when invited to come, wouldbe ingratitude. It must not be: and yet the danger of a renewal of theacquaintance--!After much thinking, she could determine on nothing better, thanHarriet's returning the visit; but in a way that, if they hadunderstanding, should convince them that it was to be only a formalacquaintance. She meant to take her in the carriage, leave her at theAbbey Mill, while she drove a little farther, and call for her againso soon, as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerousrecurrences to the past, and give the most decided proof of what degreeof intimacy was chosen for the future.She could think of nothing better: and though there was something in itwhich her own heart could not approve--something of ingratitude, merelyglossed over--it must be done, or what would become of Harriet?CHAPTER VSmall heart had Harriet for visiting. Only half an hour before herfriend called for her at Mrs. Goddard's, her evil stars had led herto the very spot where, at that moment, a trunk, directed to _The Rev.Philip Elton, White-Hart, Bath_, was to be seen under the operation ofbeing lifted into the butcher's cart, which was to convey it to wherethe coaches past; and every thing in this world, excepting that trunkand the direction, was consequently a blank.She went, however; and when they reached the farm, and she was to beput down, at the end of the broad, neat gravel walk, which led betweenespalier apple-trees to the front door, the sight of every thing whichhad given her so much pleasure the autumn before, was beginning torevive a little local agitation; and when they parted, Emma observed herto be looking around with a sort of fearful curiosity, which determinedher not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed quarter of an hour.She went on herself, to give that portion of time to an old servant whowas married, and settled in Donwell.The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again;and Miss Smith receiving her summons, was with her without delay, andunattended by any alarming young man. She came solitarily down thegravel walk--a Miss Martin just appearing at the door, and parting withher seemingly with ceremonious civility.Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account. She wasfeeling too much; but at last Emma collected from her enough tounderstand the sort of meeting, and the sort of pain it was creating.She had seen only Mrs. Martin and the two girls. They had received herdoubtingly, if not coolly; and nothing beyond the merest commonplace hadbeen talked almost all the time--till just at last, when Mrs. Martin'ssaying, all of a sudden, that she thought Miss Smith was grown, hadbrought on a more interesting subject, and a warmer manner. In that veryroom she had been measured last September, with her two friends. Therewere the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot by the window._He_ had done it. They all seemed to remember the day, the hour,the party, the occasion--to feel the same consciousness, the sameregrets--to be ready to return to the same good understanding; and theywere just growing again like themselves, (Harriet, as Emma must suspect,as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy,) when the carriagereappeared, and all was over. The style of the visit, and the shortnessof it, were then felt to be decisive. Fourteen minutes to be givento those with whom she had thankfully passed six weeks not six monthsago!--Emma could not but picture it all, and feel how justly they mightresent, how naturally Harriet must suffer. It was a bad business. Shewould have given a great deal, or endured a great deal, to have hadthe Martins in a higher rank of life. They were so deserving, that a_little_ higher should have been enough: but as it was, how could shehave done otherwise?--Impossible!--She could not repent. They must beseparated; but there was a great deal of pain in the process--so muchto herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessity of a littleconsolation, and resolved on going home by way of Randalls toprocure it. Her mind was quite sick of Mr. Elton and the Martins. Therefreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary.It was a good scheme; but on driving to the door they heard that neither"master nor mistress was at home;" they had both been out some time; theman believed they were gone to Hartfield]
 [This is too bad," cried Emma, as they turned away. "And now we shalljust miss them; too provoking!--I do not know when I have been sodisappointed]
 [ And she leaned back in the corner, to indulge hermurmurs, or to reason them away; probably a little of both--such beingthe commonest process of a not ill-disposed mind. Presently the carriagestopt; she looked up; it was stopt by Mr. and Mrs. Weston, who werestanding to speak to her. There was instant pleasure in the sight ofthem, and still greater pleasure was conveyed in sound--for Mr. Westonimmediately accosted her with,"How d'ye do?--how d'ye do?--We have been sitting with your father--gladto see him so well. Frank comes to-morrow--I had a letter thismorning--we see him to-morrow by dinner-time to a certainty--he is atOxford to-day, and he comes for a whole fortnight; I knew it would beso. If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days; Iwas always glad he did not come at Christmas; now we are going to havejust the right weather for him, fine, dry, settled weather. We shallenjoy him completely; every thing has turned out exactly as we couldwish]
 [There was no resisting such news, no possibility of avoiding theinfluence of such a happy face as Mr. Weston's, confirmed as it all wasby the words and the countenance of his wife, fewer and quieter, but notless to the purpose. To know that _she_ thought his coming certain wasenough to make Emma consider it so, and sincerely did she rejoice intheir joy. It was a most delightful reanimation of exhausted spirits.The worn-out past was sunk in the freshness of what was coming; and inthe rapidity of half a moment's thought, she hoped Mr. Elton would nowbe talked of no more.Mr. Weston gave her the history of the engagements at Enscombe, whichallowed his son to answer for having an entire fortnight at his command,as well as the route and the method of his journey; and she listened,and smiled, and congratulated]
 [I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield," said he, at the conclusion.Emma could imagine she saw a touch of the arm at this speech, from hiswife]
 [We had better move on, Mr. Weston," said she, "we are detaining thegirls]
 ["Well, well, I am ready;"--and turning again to Emma, "but you mustnot be expecting such a _very_ fine young man; you have onlyhad _my_ account you know; I dare say he is really nothingextraordinary:"--though his own sparkling eyes at the moment werespeaking a very different conviction.Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent, and answer in amanner that appropriated nothing]
 [Think of me to-morrow, my dear Emma, about four o'clock," was Mrs.Weston's parting injunction; spoken with some anxiety, and meant onlyfor her]
 [Four o'clock!--depend upon it he will be here by three," was Mr.Weston's quick amendment; and so ended a most satisfactory meeting.Emma's spirits were mounted quite up to happiness; every thing worea different air; James and his horses seemed not half so sluggish asbefore. When she looked at the hedges, she thought the elder at leastmust soon be coming out; and when she turned round to Harriet, she sawsomething like a look of spring, a tender smile even there]
 [Will Mr. Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well as Oxford?"--was aquestion, however, which did not augur much.But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once, and Emmawas now in a humour to resolve that they should both come in time.The morning of the interesting day arrived, and Mrs. Weston's faithfulpupil did not forget either at ten, or eleven, or twelve o'clock, thatshe was to think of her at four]
 [My dear, dear anxious friend,"--said she, in mental soliloquy, whilewalking downstairs from her own room, "always overcareful for everybody's comfort but your own; I see you now in all your little fidgets,going again and again into his room, to be sure that all is right]
 [The clock struck twelve as she passed through the hall. "'Tis twelve;I shall not forget to think of you four hours hence; and by thistime to-morrow, perhaps, or a little later, I may be thinking of thepossibility of their all calling here. I am sure they will bring himsoon]
 [She opened the parlour door, and saw two gentlemen sitting with herfather--Mr. Weston and his son. They had been arrived only a fewminutes, and Mr. Weston had scarcely finished his explanation of Frank'sbeing a day before his time, and her father was yet in the midst of hisvery civil welcome and congratulations, when she appeared, to have hershare of surprize, introduction, and pleasure.The Frank Churchill so long talked of, so high in interest, was actuallybefore her--he was presented to her, and she did not think too much hadbeen said in his praise; he was a _very_ good looking young man; height,air, address, all were unexceptionable, and his countenance had a greatdeal of the spirit and liveliness of his father's; he looked quick andsensible. She felt immediately that she should like him; and there wasa well-bred ease of manner, and a readiness to talk, which convinced herthat he came intending to be acquainted with her, and that acquaintedthey soon must be.He had reached Randalls the evening before. She was pleased with theeagerness to arrive which had made him alter his plan, and travelearlier, later, and quicker, that he might gain half a day]
 [I told you yesterday," cried Mr. Weston with exultation, "I told youall that he would be here before the time named. I remembered what Iused to do myself. One cannot creep upon a journey; one cannot helpgetting on faster than one has planned; and the pleasure of coming inupon one's friends before the look-out begins, is worth a great dealmore than any little exertion it needs]
 ["It is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it," said the youngman, "though there are not many houses that I should presume on so far;but in coming _home_ I felt I might do any thing]
 [The word _home_ made his father look on him with fresh complacency.Emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable; theconviction was strengthened by what followed. He was very much pleasedwith Randalls, thought it a most admirably arranged house, would hardlyallow it even to be very small, admired the situation, the walk toHighbury, Highbury itself, Hartfield still more, and professed himselfto have always felt the sort of interest in the country which none butone's _own_ country gives, and the greatest curiosity to visit it. Thathe should never have been able to indulge so amiable a feeling before,passed suspiciously through Emma's brain; but still, if it were afalsehood, it was a pleasant one, and pleasantly handled. His manner hadno air of study or exaggeration. He did really look and speak as if in astate of no common enjoyment.Their subjects in general were such as belong to an openingacquaintance. On his side were the inquiries,--"Was she ahorsewoman?--Pleasant rides?--Pleasant walks?--Had they a largeneighbourhood?--Highbury, perhaps, afforded society enough?--There wereseveral very pretty houses in and about it.--Balls--had they balls?--Wasit a musical society?"But when satisfied on all these points, and their acquaintanceproportionably advanced, he contrived to find an opportunity, whiletheir two fathers were engaged with each other, of introducing hismother-in-law, and speaking of her with so much handsome praise, so muchwarm admiration, so much gratitude for the happiness she secured to hisfather, and her very kind reception of himself, as was an additionalproof of his knowing how to please--and of his certainly thinking itworth while to try to please her. He did not advance a word of praisebeyond what she knew to be thoroughly deserved by Mrs. Weston; but,undoubtedly he could know very little of the matter. He understoodwhat would be welcome; he could be sure of little else. "His father'smarriage," he said, "had been the wisest measure, every friend mustrejoice in it; and the family from whom he had received such a blessingmust be ever considered as having conferred the highest obligation onhim]
 [He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor's merits,without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things itwas to be rather supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Woodhouse'scharacter, than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor's. And at last, as ifresolved to qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to itsobject, he wound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty ofher person]
 [Elegant, agreeable manners, I was prepared for," said he; "but Iconfess that, considering every thing, I had not expected more than avery tolerably well-looking woman of a certain age; I did not know thatI was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs. Weston]
 ["You cannot see too much perfection in Mrs. Weston for my feelings,"said Emma; "were you to guess her to be _eighteen_, I should listen withpleasure; but _she_ would be ready to quarrel with you for using suchwords. Don't let her imagine that you have spoken of her as a prettyyoung woman]
 ["I hope I should know better," he replied; "no, depend upon it, (with agallant bow,) that in addressing Mrs. Weston I should understand whomI might praise without any danger of being thought extravagant in myterms]
 [Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected fromtheir knowing each other, which had taken strong possession of her mind,had ever crossed his; and whether his compliments were to be consideredas marks of acquiescence, or proofs of defiance. She must see moreof him to understand his ways; at present she only felt they wereagreeable.She had no doubt of what Mr. Weston was often thinking about. His quickeye she detected again and again glancing towards them with a happyexpression; and even, when he might have determined not to look, she wasconfident that he was often listening.Her own father's perfect exemption from any thought of the kind, theentire deficiency in him of all such sort of penetration or suspicion,was a most comfortable circumstance. Happily he was not farther fromapproving matrimony than from foreseeing it.--Though always objectingto every marriage that was arranged, he never suffered beforehand fromthe apprehension of any; it seemed as if he could not think so ill ofany two persons' understanding as to suppose they meant to marry till itwere proved against them. She blessed the favouring blindness. He couldnow, without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise, without aglance forward at any possible treachery in his guest, give way to allhis natural kind-hearted civility in solicitous inquiries after Mr.Frank Churchill's accommodation on his journey, through the sad evilsof sleeping two nights on the road, and express very genuine unmixedanxiety to know that he had certainly escaped catching cold--which,however, he could not allow him to feel quite assured of himself tillafter another night.A reasonable visit paid, Mr. Weston began to move.--"He must be going.He had business at the Crown about his hay, and a great many errands forMrs. Weston at Ford's, but he need not hurry any body else]
 [ His son,too well bred to hear the hint, rose immediately also, saying,"As you are going farther on business, sir, I will take the opportunityof paying a visit, which must be paid some day or other, and thereforemay as well be paid now. I have the honour of being acquainted witha neighbour of yours, (turning to Emma,) a lady residing in or nearHighbury; a family of the name of Fairfax. I shall have no difficulty,I suppose, in finding the house; though Fairfax, I believe, is notthe proper name--I should rather say Barnes, or Bates. Do you know anyfamily of that name?""To be sure we do," cried his father; "Mrs. Bates--we passed herhouse--I saw Miss Bates at the window. True, true, you are acquaintedwith Miss Fairfax; I remember you knew her at Weymouth, and a fine girlshe is. Call upon her, by all means]
 ["There is no necessity for my calling this morning," said the young man;"another day would do as well; but there was that degree of acquaintanceat Weymouth which--""Oh! go to-day, go to-day. Do not defer it. What is right to be donecannot be done too soon. And, besides, I must give you a hint, Frank;any want of attention to her _here_ should be carefully avoided. You sawher with the Campbells, when she was the equal of every body she mixedwith, but here she is with a poor old grandmother, who has barely enoughto live on. If you do not call early it will be a slight]
 [The son looked convinced]
 [I have heard her speak of the acquaintance," said Emma; "she is a veryelegant young woman]
 [He agreed to it, but with so quiet a "Yes," as inclined her almost todoubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct sortof elegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could be thoughtonly ordinarily gifted with it]
 [If you were never particularly struck by her manners before," said she,"I think you will to-day. You will see her to advantage; see her andhear her--no, I am afraid you will not hear her at all, for she has anaunt who never holds her tongue]
 ["You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, are you?" said Mr.Woodhouse, always the last to make his way in conversation; "then giveme leave to assure you that you will find her a very agreeable younglady. She is staying here on a visit to her grandmama and aunt, veryworthy people; I have known them all my life. They will be extremelyglad to see you, I am sure; and one of my servants shall go with you toshew you the way]
 ["My dear sir, upon no account in the world; my father can direct me]
 ["But your father is not going so far; he is only going to the Crown,quite on the other side of the street, and there are a great manyhouses; you might be very much at a loss, and it is a very dirty walk,unless you keep on the footpath; but my coachman can tell you where youhad best cross the street]
 [Mr. Frank Churchill still declined it, looking as serious as he could,and his father gave his hearty support by calling out, "My good friend,this is quite unnecessary; Frank knows a puddle of water when he seesit, and as to Mrs. Bates's, he may get there from the Crown in a hop,step, and jump]
 [They were permitted to go alone; and with a cordial nod from one, and agraceful bow from the other, the two gentlemen took leave. Emma remainedvery well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance, and could nowengage to think of them all at Randalls any hour of the day, with fullconfidence in their comfort.CHAPTER VIThe next morning brought Mr. Frank Churchill again. He came with Mrs.Weston, to whom and to Highbury he seemed to take very cordially. He hadbeen sitting with her, it appeared, most companionably at home, tillher usual hour of exercise; and on being desired to chuse their walk,immediately fixed on Highbury.--"He did not doubt there being verypleasant walks in every direction, but if left to him, he should alwayschuse the same. Highbury, that airy, cheerful, happy-looking Highbury,would be his constant attraction]
 [--Highbury, with Mrs. Weston, stoodfor Hartfield; and she trusted to its bearing the same construction withhim. They walked thither directly.Emma had hardly expected them: for Mr. Weston, who had called in forhalf a minute, in order to hear that his son was very handsome, knewnothing of their plans; and it was an agreeable surprize to her,therefore, to perceive them walking up to the house together, arm inarm. She was wanting to see him again, and especially to see him incompany with Mrs. Weston, upon his behaviour to whom her opinion of himwas to depend. If he were deficient there, nothing should make amendsfor it. But on seeing them together, she became perfectly satisfied. Itwas not merely in fine words or hyperbolical compliment that he paid hisduty; nothing could be more proper or pleasing than his whole manner toher--nothing could more agreeably denote his wish of considering her asa friend and securing her affection. And there was time enough for Emmato form a reasonable judgment, as their visit included all the rest ofthe morning. They were all three walking about together for an houror two--first round the shrubberies of Hartfield, and afterwardsin Highbury. He was delighted with every thing; admired Hartfieldsufficiently for Mr. Woodhouse's ear; and when their going farther wasresolved on, confessed his wish to be made acquainted with the wholevillage, and found matter of commendation and interest much oftener thanEmma could have supposed.Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings. Hebegged to be shewn the house which his father had lived in so long, andwhich had been the home of his father's father; and on recollecting thatan old woman who had nursed him was still living, walked in quest ofher cottage from one end of the street to the other; and though insome points of pursuit or observation there was no positive merit, theyshewed, altogether, a good-will towards Highbury in general, which mustbe very like a merit to those he was with.Emma watched and decided, that with such feelings as were now shewn, itcould not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily absentinghimself; that he had not been acting a part, or making a parade ofinsincere professions; and that Mr. Knightley certainly had not done himjustice.Their first pause was at the Crown Inn, an inconsiderable house, thoughthe principal one of the sort, where a couple of pair of post-horseswere kept, more for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from anyrun on the road; and his companions had not expected to be detained byany interest excited there; but in passing it they gave the history ofthe large room visibly added; it had been built many years ago fora ball-room, and while the neighbourhood had been in a particularlypopulous, dancing state, had been occasionally used as such;--but suchbrilliant days had long passed away, and now the highest purpose forwhich it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whist club establishedamong the gentlemen and half-gentlemen of the place. He was immediatelyinterested. Its character as a ball-room caught him; and instead ofpassing on, he stopt for several minutes at the two superior sashedwindows which were open, to look in and contemplate its capabilities,and lament that its original purpose should have ceased. He saw no faultin the room, he would acknowledge none which they suggested. No, itwas long enough, broad enough, handsome enough. It would hold thevery number for comfort. They ought to have balls there at least everyfortnight through the winter. Why had not Miss Woodhouse revivedthe former good old days of the room?--She who could do any thing inHighbury! The want of proper families in the place, and the convictionthat none beyond the place and its immediate environs could be temptedto attend, were mentioned; but he was not satisfied. He could not bepersuaded that so many good-looking houses as he saw around him, couldnot furnish numbers enough for such a meeting; and even when particularswere given and families described, he was still unwilling to admit thatthe inconvenience of such a mixture would be any thing, or that therewould be the smallest difficulty in every body's returning into theirproper place the next morning. He argued like a young man very much benton dancing; and Emma was rather surprized to see the constitution ofthe Weston prevail so decidedly against the habits of the Churchills.He seemed to have all the life and spirit, cheerful feelings, and socialinclinations of his father, and nothing of the pride or reserve ofEnscombe. Of pride, indeed, there was, perhaps, scarcely enough; hisindifference to a confusion of rank, bordered too much on inelegance ofmind. He could be no judge, however, of the evil he was holding cheap.It was but an effusion of lively spirits.At last he was persuaded to move on from the front of the Crown;and being now almost facing the house where the Bateses lodged, Emmarecollected his intended visit the day before, and asked him if he hadpaid it]
 [Yes, oh! yes"--he replied; "I was just going to mention it. A verysuccessful visit:--I saw all the three ladies; and felt very muchobliged to you for your preparatory hint. If the talking aunt had takenme quite by surprize, it must have been the death of me. As it was, Iwas only betrayed into paying a most unreasonable visit. Ten minuteswould have been all that was necessary, perhaps all that was proper; andI had told my father I should certainly be at home before him--but therewas no getting away, no pause; and, to my utter astonishment, I found,when he (finding me nowhere else) joined me there at last, that I hadbeen actually sitting with them very nearly three-quarters of an hour.The good lady had not given me the possibility of escape before]
 ["And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking?""Ill, very ill--that is, if a young lady can ever be allowed to lookill. But the expression is hardly admissible, Mrs. Weston, is it? Ladiescan never look ill. And, seriously, Miss Fairfax is naturally sopale, as almost always to give the appearance of ill health.--A mostdeplorable want of complexion]
 [Emma would not agree to this, and began a warm defence of Miss Fairfax'scomplexion. "It was certainly never brilliant, but she would notallow it to have a sickly hue in general; and there was a softness anddelicacy in her skin which gave peculiar elegance to the character ofher face]
 [ He listened with all due deference; acknowledged that he hadheard many people say the same--but yet he must confess, that to himnothing could make amends for the want of the fine glow of health. Wherefeatures were indifferent, a fine complexion gave beauty to them all;and where they were good, the effect was--fortunately he need notattempt to describe what the effect was]
 [Well," said Emma, "there is no disputing about taste.--At least youadmire her except her complexion]
 [He shook his head and laughed.--"I cannot separate Miss Fairfax and hercomplexion]
 ["Did you see her often at Weymouth? Were you often in the same society?"At this moment they were approaching Ford's, and he hastily exclaimed,"Ha! this must be the very shop that every body attends every day oftheir lives, as my father informs me. He comes to Highbury himself, hesays, six days out of the seven, and has always business at Ford's.If it be not inconvenient to you, pray let us go in, that I may provemyself to belong to the place, to be a true citizen of Highbury. I mustbuy something at Ford's. It will be taking out my freedom.--I dare saythey sell gloves]
 ["Oh! yes, gloves and every thing. I do admire your patriotism. You willbe adored in Highbury. You were very popular before you came, becauseyou were Mr. Weston's son--but lay out half a guinea at Ford's, and yourpopularity will stand upon your own virtues]
 [They went in; and while the sleek, well-tied parcels of "Men's Beavers"and "York Tan" were bringing down and displaying on the counter, hesaid--"But I beg your pardon, Miss Woodhouse, you were speaking to me,you were saying something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor__patriae_. Do not let me lose it. I assure you the utmost stretch ofpublic fame would not make me amends for the loss of any happiness inprivate life]
 ["I merely asked, whether you had known much of Miss Fairfax and herparty at Weymouth]
 ["And now that I understand your question, I must pronounce it to be avery unfair one. It is always the lady's right to decide on the degreeof acquaintance. Miss Fairfax must already have given her account.--Ishall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow]
 ["Upon my word! you answer as discreetly as she could do herself. Buther account of every thing leaves so much to be guessed, she is so veryreserved, so very unwilling to give the least information about anybody, that I really think you may say what you like of your acquaintancewith her]
 ["May I, indeed?--Then I will speak the truth, and nothing suits me sowell. I met her frequently at Weymouth. I had known the Campbells alittle in town; and at Weymouth we were very much in the same set.Colonel Campbell is a very agreeable man, and Mrs. Campbell a friendly,warm-hearted woman. I like them all]
 ["You know Miss Fairfax's situation in life, I conclude; what she isdestined to be?""Yes--(rather hesitatingly)--I believe I do]
 ["You get upon delicate subjects, Emma," said Mrs. Weston smiling;"remember that I am here.--Mr. Frank Churchill hardly knows what to saywhen you speak of Miss Fairfax's situation in life. I will move a littlefarther off]
 ["I certainly do forget to think of _her_," said Emma, "as having everbeen any thing but my friend and my dearest friend]
 [He looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment.When the gloves were bought, and they had quitted the shop again, "Didyou ever hear the young lady we were speaking of, play?" said FrankChurchill]
 [Ever hear her!" repeated Emma. "You forget how much she belongs toHighbury. I have heard her every year of our lives since we both began.She plays charmingly]
 ["You think so, do you?--I wanted the opinion of some one whocould really judge. She appeared to me to play well, that is, withconsiderable taste, but I know nothing of the matter myself.--I amexcessively fond of music, but without the smallest skill or rightof judging of any body's performance.--I have been used to hear her'sadmired; and I remember one proof of her being thought to play well:--aman, a very musical man, and in love with another woman--engaged toher--on the point of marriage--would yet never ask that other womanto sit down to the instrument, if the lady in question could sit downinstead--never seemed to like to hear one if he could hear the other.That, I thought, in a man of known musical talent, was some proof]
 ["Proof indeed!" said Emma, highly amused.--"Mr. Dixon is very musical,is he? We shall know more about them all, in half an hour, from you,than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year]
 ["Yes, Mr. Dixon and Miss Campbell were the persons; and I thought it avery strong proof]
 ["Certainly--very strong it was; to own the truth, a great deal strongerthan, if _I_ had been Miss Campbell, would have been at all agreeableto me. I could not excuse a man's having more music than love--more earthan eye--a more acute sensibility to fine sounds than to my feelings.How did Miss Campbell appear to like it?""It was her very particular friend, you know]
 ["Poor comfort!" said Emma, laughing. "One would rather have a strangerpreferred than one's very particular friend--with a stranger it mightnot recur again--but the misery of having a very particular friendalways at hand, to do every thing better than one does oneself!--PoorMrs. Dixon! Well, I am glad she is gone to settle in Ireland]
 ["You are right. It was not very flattering to Miss Campbell; but shereally did not seem to feel it]
 ["So much the better--or so much the worse:--I do not know which. Butbe it sweetness or be it stupidity in her--quickness of friendship, ordulness of feeling--there was one person, I think, who must have feltit: Miss Fairfax herself. She must have felt the improper and dangerousdistinction]
 ["As to that--I do not--""Oh! do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax'ssensations from you, or from any body else. They are known to no humanbeing, I guess, but herself. But if she continued to play whenever shewas asked by Mr. Dixon, one may guess what one chuses]
 ["There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all--"he began rather quickly, but checking himself, added, "however, it isimpossible for me to say on what terms they really were--how it mightall be behind the scenes. I can only say that there was smoothnessoutwardly. But you, who have known Miss Fairfax from a child, must bea better judge of her character, and of how she is likely to conductherself in critical situations, than I can be]
 ["I have known her from a child, undoubtedly; we have been childrenand women together; and it is natural to suppose that we should beintimate,--that we should have taken to each other whenever she visitedher friends. But we never did. I hardly know how it has happened; alittle, perhaps, from that wickedness on my side which was prone to takedisgust towards a girl so idolized and so cried up as she always was,by her aunt and grandmother, and all their set. And then, her reserve--Inever could attach myself to any one so completely reserved]
 ["It is a most repulsive quality, indeed," said he. "Oftentimes veryconvenient, no doubt, but never pleasing. There is safety in reserve,but no attraction. One cannot love a reserved person]
 ["Not till the reserve ceases towards oneself; and then the attractionmay be the greater. But I must be more in want of a friend, or anagreeable companion, than I have yet been, to take the trouble ofconquering any body's reserve to procure one. Intimacy between MissFairfax and me is quite out of the question. I have no reason to thinkill of her--not the least--except that such extreme and perpetualcautiousness of word and manner, such a dread of giving a distinct ideaabout any body, is apt to suggest suspicions of there being something toconceal]
 [He perfectly agreed with her: and after walking together so long, andthinking so much alike, Emma felt herself so well acquainted with him,that she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting. He wasnot exactly what she had expected; less of the man of the world in someof his notions, less of the spoiled child of fortune, therefore betterthan she had expected. His ideas seemed more moderate--his feelingswarmer. She was particularly struck by his manner of considering Mr.Elton's house, which, as well as the church, he would go and look at,and would not join them in finding much fault with. No, he could notbelieve it a bad house; not such a house as a man was to be pitied forhaving. If it were to be shared with the woman he loved, he could notthink any man to be pitied for having that house. There must be ampleroom in it for every real comfort. The man must be a blockhead whowanted more.Mrs. Weston laughed, and said he did not know what he was talking about.Used only to a large house himself, and without ever thinking how manyadvantages and accommodations were attached to its size, he could be nojudge of the privations inevitably belonging to a small one. But Emma,in her own mind, determined that he _did_ know what he was talkingabout, and that he shewed a very amiable inclination to settle early inlife, and to marry, from worthy motives. He might not be aware of theinroads on domestic peace to be occasioned by no housekeeper's room, ora bad butler's pantry, but no doubt he did perfectly feel that Enscombecould not make him happy, and that whenever he were attached, he wouldwillingly give up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment.CHAPTER VIIEmma's very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken thefollowing day, by hearing that he was gone off to London, merely to havehis hair cut. A sudden freak seemed to have seized him at breakfast, andhe had sent for a chaise and set off, intending to return to dinner,but with no more important view that appeared than having his hair cut.There was certainly no harm in his travelling sixteen miles twice overon such an errand; but there was an air of foppery and nonsense in itwhich she could not approve. It did not accord with the rationality ofplan, the moderation in expense, or even the unselfish warmth of heart,which she had believed herself to discern in him yesterday. Vanity,extravagance, love of change, restlessness of temper, which must bedoing something, good or bad; heedlessness as to the pleasure of hisfather and Mrs. Weston, indifferent as to how his conduct might appearin general; he became liable to all these charges. His father onlycalled him a coxcomb, and thought it a very good story; but that Mrs.Weston did not like it, was clear enough, by her passing it over asquickly as possible, and making no other comment than that "all youngpeople would have their little whims]
 [With the exception of this little blot, Emma found that his visithitherto had given her friend only good ideas of him. Mrs. Westonwas very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he madehimself--how much she saw to like in his disposition altogether. Heappeared to have a very open temper--certainly a very cheerful andlively one; she could observe nothing wrong in his notions, a great dealdecidedly right; he spoke of his uncle with warm regard, was fond oftalking of him--said he would be the best man in the world if he wereleft to himself; and though there was no being attached to the aunt, heacknowledged her kindness with gratitude, and seemed to mean always tospeak of her with respect. This was all very promising; and, but forsuch an unfortunate fancy for having his hair cut, there was nothing todenote him unworthy of the distinguished honour which her imaginationhad given him; the honour, if not of being really in love with her,of being at least very near it, and saved only by her ownindifference--(for still her resolution held of never marrying)--thehonour, in short, of being marked out for her by all their jointacquaintance.Mr. Weston, on his side, added a virtue to the account which musthave some weight. He gave her to understand that Frank admired herextremely--thought her very beautiful and very charming; and with somuch to be said for him altogether, she found she must not judge himharshly. As Mrs. Weston observed, "all young people would have theirlittle whims]
 [There was one person among his new acquaintance in Surry, not soleniently disposed. In general he was judged, throughout the parishes ofDonwell and Highbury, with great candour; liberal allowances were madefor the little excesses of such a handsome young man--one who smiled sooften and bowed so well; but there was one spirit among them not to besoftened, from its power of censure, by bows or smiles--Mr. Knightley.The circumstance was told him at Hartfield; for the moment, he wassilent; but Emma heard him almost immediately afterwards say to himself,over a newspaper he held in his hand, "Hum! just the trifling, sillyfellow I took him for]
 [ She had half a mind to resent; but an instant'sobservation convinced her that it was really said only to relieve hisown feelings, and not meant to provoke; and therefore she let it pass.Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings, Mr. andMrs. Weston's visit this morning was in another respect particularlyopportune. Something occurred while they were at Hartfield, to make Emmawant their advice; and, which was still more lucky, she wanted exactlythe advice they gave.This was the occurrence:--The Coles had been settled some years inHighbury, and were very good sort of people--friendly, liberal, andunpretending; but, on the other hand, they were of low origin, in trade,and only moderately genteel. On their first coming into the country,they had lived in proportion to their income, quietly, keeping littlecompany, and that little unexpensively; but the last year or two hadbrought them a considerable increase of means--the house in town hadyielded greater profits, and fortune in general had smiled on them. Withtheir wealth, their views increased; their want of a larger house, theirinclination for more company. They added to their house, to their numberof servants, to their expenses of every sort; and by this time were,in fortune and style of living, second only to the family at Hartfield.Their love of society, and their new dining-room, prepared every bodyfor their keeping dinner-company; and a few parties, chiefly among thesingle men, had already taken place. The regular and best families Emmacould hardly suppose they would presume to invite--neither Donwell, norHartfield, nor Randalls. Nothing should tempt _her_ to go, if they did;and she regretted that her father's known habits would be givingher refusal less meaning than she could wish. The Coles were veryrespectable in their way, but they ought to be taught that it was notfor them to arrange the terms on which the superior families would visitthem. This lesson, she very much feared, they would receive only fromherself; she had little hope of Mr. Knightley, none of Mr. Weston.But she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so many weeksbefore it appeared, that when the insult came at last, it found hervery differently affected. Donwell and Randalls had received theirinvitation, and none had come for her father and herself; and Mrs.Weston's accounting for it with "I suppose they will not take theliberty with you; they know you do not dine out," was not quitesufficient. She felt that she should like to have had the power ofrefusal; and afterwards, as the idea of the party to be assembled there,consisting precisely of those whose society was dearest to her, occurredagain and again, she did not know that she might not have been temptedto accept. Harriet was to be there in the evening, and the Bateses. Theyhad been speaking of it as they walked about Highbury the day before,and Frank Churchill had most earnestly lamented her absence. Mightnot the evening end in a dance? had been a question of his. The barepossibility of it acted as a farther irritation on her spirits; andher being left in solitary grandeur, even supposing the omission to beintended as a compliment, was but poor comfort.It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were atHartfield, which made their presence so acceptable; for though her firstremark, on reading it, was that "of course it must be declined," she sovery soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to do, that theiradvice for her going was most prompt and successful.She owned that, considering every thing, she was not absolutelywithout inclination for the party. The Coles expressed themselves soproperly--there was so much real attention in the manner of it--so muchconsideration for her father. "They would have solicited the honourearlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen fromLondon, which they hoped might keep Mr. Woodhouse from any draught ofair, and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honourof his company]
 [ Upon the whole, she was very persuadable; and it beingbriefly settled among themselves how it might be done without neglectinghis comfort--how certainly Mrs. Goddard, if not Mrs. Bates, might bedepended on for bearing him company--Mr. Woodhouse was to be talkedinto an acquiescence of his daughter's going out to dinner on a day nownear at hand, and spending the whole evening away from him. As for _his_going, Emma did not wish him to think it possible, the hours would betoo late, and the party too numerous. He was soon pretty well resigned]
 [I am not fond of dinner-visiting," said he--"I never was. No more isEmma. Late hours do not agree with us. I am sorry Mr. and Mrs. Coleshould have done it. I think it would be much better if they would comein one afternoon next summer, and take their tea with us--take usin their afternoon walk; which they might do, as our hours are soreasonable, and yet get home without being out in the damp of theevening. The dews of a summer evening are what I would not expose anybody to. However, as they are so very desirous to have dear Emma dinewith them, and as you will both be there, and Mr. Knightley too, to takecare of her, I cannot wish to prevent it, provided the weather be whatit ought, neither damp, nor cold, nor windy]
 [ Then turning to Mrs.Weston, with a look of gentle reproach--"Ah! Miss Taylor, if you had notmarried, you would have staid at home with me]
 ["Well, sir," cried Mr. Weston, "as I took Miss Taylor away, it isincumbent on me to supply her place, if I can; and I will step to Mrs.Goddard in a moment, if you wish it]
 [But the idea of any thing to be done in a _moment_, was increasing,not lessening, Mr. Woodhouse's agitation. The ladies knew better howto allay it. Mr. Weston must be quiet, and every thing deliberatelyarranged.With this treatment, Mr. Woodhouse was soon composed enough for talkingas usual. "He should be happy to see Mrs. Goddard. He had a great regardfor Mrs. Goddard; and Emma should write a line, and invite her. Jamescould take the note. But first of all, there must be an answer writtento Mrs. Cole]
 ["You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly as possible. You will saythat I am quite an invalid, and go no where, and therefore must declinetheir obliging invitation; beginning with my _compliments_, of course.But you will do every thing right. I need not tell you what is to bedone. We must remember to let James know that the carriage will bewanted on Tuesday. I shall have no fears for you with him. We have neverbeen there above once since the new approach was made; but still I haveno doubt that James will take you very safely. And when you get there,you must tell him at what time you would have him come for you again;and you had better name an early hour. You will not like staying late.You will get very tired when tea is over]
 ["But you would not wish me to come away before I am tired, papa?""Oh! no, my love; but you will soon be tired. There will be a great manypeople talking at once. You will not like the noise]
 ["But, my dear sir," cried Mr. Weston, "if Emma comes away early, it willbe breaking up the party]
 ["And no great harm if it does," said Mr. Woodhouse. "The sooner everyparty breaks up, the better]
 ["But you do not consider how it may appear to the Coles. Emma's goingaway directly after tea might be giving offence. They are good-naturedpeople, and think little of their own claims; but still they mustfeel that any body's hurrying away is no great compliment; and MissWoodhouse's doing it would be more thought of than any other person's inthe room. You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles, I amsure, sir; friendly, good sort of people as ever lived, and who havebeen your neighbours these _ten_ years]
 ["No, upon no account in the world, Mr. Weston; I am much obliged toyou for reminding me. I should be extremely sorry to be giving them anypain. I know what worthy people they are. Perry tells me that Mr. Colenever touches malt liquor. You would not think it to look at him, buthe is bilious--Mr. Cole is very bilious. No, I would not be the meansof giving them any pain. My dear Emma, we must consider this. I am sure,rather than run the risk of hurting Mr. and Mrs. Cole, you would stay alittle longer than you might wish. You will not regard being tired. Youwill be perfectly safe, you know, among your friends]
 ["Oh yes, papa. I have no fears at all for myself; and I should have noscruples of staying as late as Mrs. Weston, but on your account. I amonly afraid of your sitting up for me. I am not afraid of your not beingexceedingly comfortable with Mrs. Goddard. She loves piquet, youknow; but when she is gone home, I am afraid you will be sitting up byyourself, instead of going to bed at your usual time--and the idea ofthat would entirely destroy my comfort. You must promise me not to situp]
 [He did, on the condition of some promises on her side: such as that,if she came home cold, she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly; ifhungry, that she would take something to eat; that her own maid shouldsit up for her; and that Serle and the butler should see that everything were safe in the house, as usual.CHAPTER VIIIFrank Churchill came back again; and if he kept his father's dinnerwaiting, it was not known at Hartfield; for Mrs. Weston was too anxiousfor his being a favourite with Mr. Woodhouse, to betray any imperfectionwhich could be concealed.He came back, had had his hair cut, and laughed at himself with a verygood grace, but without seeming really at all ashamed of what he haddone. He had no reason to wish his hair longer, to conceal any confusionof face; no reason to wish the money unspent, to improve his spirits.He was quite as undaunted and as lively as ever; and, after seeing him,Emma thus moralised to herself:--"I do not know whether it ought to be so, but certainly silly thingsdo cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudentway. Wickedness is always wickedness, but folly is not always folly.--Itdepends upon the character of those who handle it. Mr. Knightley, he is_not_ a trifling, silly young man. If he were, he would have done thisdifferently. He would either have gloried in the achievement, orbeen ashamed of it. There would have been either the ostentation ofa coxcomb, or the evasions of a mind too weak to defend its ownvanities.--No, I am perfectly sure that he is not trifling or silly]
 [With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again, and fora longer time than hitherto; of judging of his general manners, and byinference, of the meaning of his manners towards herself; of guessinghow soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness into her air;and of fancying what the observations of all those might be, who werenow seeing them together for the first time.She meant to be very happy, in spite of the scene being laid at Mr.Cole's; and without being able to forget that among the failings of Mr.Elton, even in the days of his favour, none had disturbed her more thanhis propensity to dine with Mr. Cole.Her father's comfort was amply secured, Mrs. Bates as well as Mrs.Goddard being able to come; and her last pleasing duty, before she leftthe house, was to pay her respects to them as they sat together afterdinner; and while her father was fondly noticing the beauty of herdress, to make the two ladies all the amends in her power, by helpingthem to large slices of cake and full glasses of wine, for whateverunwilling self-denial his care of their constitution might have obligedthem to practise during the meal.--She had provided a plentiful dinnerfor them; she wished she could know that they had been allowed to eatit.She followed another carriage to Mr. Cole's door; and was pleased to seethat it was Mr. Knightley's; for Mr. Knightley keeping no horses,having little spare money and a great deal of health, activity, andindependence, was too apt, in Emma's opinion, to get about as he could,and not use his carriage so often as became the owner of Donwell Abbey.She had an opportunity now of speaking her approbation while warm fromher heart, for he stopped to hand her out]
 [This is coming as you should do," said she; "like a gentleman.--I amquite glad to see you]
 [He thanked her, observing, "How lucky that we should arrive at the samemoment! for, if we had met first in the drawing-room, I doubt whetheryou would have discerned me to be more of a gentleman than usual.--Youmight not have distinguished how I came, by my look or manner]
 ["Yes I should, I am sure I should. There is always a look ofconsciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know to bebeneath them. You think you carry it off very well, I dare say, butwith you it is a sort of bravado, an air of affected unconcern; I alwaysobserve it whenever I meet you under those circumstances. _Now_ you havenothing to try for. You are not afraid of being supposed ashamed. Youare not striving to look taller than any body else. _Now_ I shall reallybe very happy to walk into the same room with you]
 ["Nonsensical girl!" was his reply, but not at all in anger.Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party aswith Mr. Knightley. She was received with a cordial respect which couldnot but please, and given all the consequence she could wish for.When the Westons arrived, the kindest looks of love, the strongest ofadmiration were for her, from both husband and wife; the son approachedher with a cheerful eagerness which marked her as his peculiar object,and at dinner she found him seated by her--and, as she firmly believed,not without some dexterity on his side.The party was rather large, as it included one other family, a properunobjectionable country family, whom the Coles had the advantage ofnaming among their acquaintance, and the male part of Mr. Cox's family,the lawyer of Highbury. The less worthy females were to come in theevening, with Miss Bates, Miss Fairfax, and Miss Smith; but already,at dinner, they were too numerous for any subject of conversation to begeneral; and, while politics and Mr. Elton were talked over, Emma couldfairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her neighbour.The first remote sound to which she felt herself obliged to attend, wasthe name of Jane Fairfax. Mrs. Cole seemed to be relating something ofher that was expected to be very interesting. She listened, and foundit well worth listening to. That very dear part of Emma, her fancy,received an amusing supply. Mrs. Cole was telling that she had beencalling on Miss Bates, and as soon as she entered the room hadbeen struck by the sight of a pianoforte--a very elegant lookinginstrument--not a grand, but a large-sized square pianoforte; and thesubstance of the story, the end of all the dialogue which ensued ofsurprize, and inquiry, and congratulations on her side, and explanationson Miss Bates's, was, that this pianoforte had arrived fromBroadwood's the day before, to the great astonishment of both aunt andniece--entirely unexpected; that at first, by Miss Bates's account,Jane herself was quite at a loss, quite bewildered to think who couldpossibly have ordered it--but now, they were both perfectly satisfiedthat it could be from only one quarter;--of course it must be fromColonel Campbell]
 [One can suppose nothing else," added Mrs. Cole, "and I was onlysurprized that there could ever have been a doubt. But Jane, it seems,had a letter from them very lately, and not a word was said about it.She knows their ways best; but I should not consider their silence asany reason for their not meaning to make the present. They might chuseto surprize her]
 [Mrs. Cole had many to agree with her; every body who spoke on thesubject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell,and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made; and there wereenough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way, and stilllisten to Mrs. Cole]
 [I declare, I do not know when I have heard any thing that has given memore satisfaction!--It always has quite hurt me that Jane Fairfax, whoplays so delightfully, should not have an instrument. It seemed quitea shame, especially considering how many houses there are where fineinstruments are absolutely thrown away. This is like giving ourselvesa slap, to be sure! and it was but yesterday I was telling Mr. Cole,I really was ashamed to look at our new grand pianoforte in thedrawing-room, while I do not know one note from another, and our littlegirls, who are but just beginning, perhaps may never make any thing ofit; and there is poor Jane Fairfax, who is mistress of music, has notany thing of the nature of an instrument, not even the pitifullest oldspinet in the world, to amuse herself with.--I was saying this toMr. Cole but yesterday, and he quite agreed with me; only he is soparticularly fond of music that he could not help indulging himselfin the purchase, hoping that some of our good neighbours might be soobliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we can; and thatreally is the reason why the instrument was bought--or else I am surewe ought to be ashamed of it.--We are in great hopes that Miss Woodhousemay be prevailed with to try it this evening]
 [Miss Woodhouse made the proper acquiescence; and finding that nothingmore was to be entrapped from any communication of Mrs. Cole's, turnedto Frank Churchill]
 [Why do you smile?" said she]
 [Nay, why do you?""Me!--I suppose I smile for pleasure at Colonel Campbell's being so richand so liberal.--It is a handsome present]
 ["Very]
 ["I rather wonder that it was never made before]
 ["Perhaps Miss Fairfax has never been staying here so long before]
 ["Or that he did not give her the use of their own instrument--which mustnow be shut up in London, untouched by any body]
 ["That is a grand pianoforte, and he might think it too large for Mrs.Bates's house]
 ["You may _say_ what you chuse--but your countenance testifies that your_thoughts_ on this subject are very much like mine]
 ["I do not know. I rather believe you are giving me more credit foracuteness than I deserve. I smile because you smile, and shall probablysuspect whatever I find you suspect; but at present I do not see whatthere is to question. If Colonel Campbell is not the person, who canbe?""What do you say to Mrs. Dixon?""Mrs. Dixon! very true indeed. I had not thought of Mrs. Dixon. She mustknow as well as her father, how acceptable an instrument would be; andperhaps the mode of it, the mystery, the surprize, is more like a youngwoman's scheme than an elderly man's. It is Mrs. Dixon, I dare say. Itold you that your suspicions would guide mine]
 ["If so, you must extend your suspicions and comprehend _Mr_. Dixon inthem]
 ["Mr. Dixon.--Very well. Yes, I immediately perceive that it must be thejoint present of Mr. and Mrs. Dixon. We were speaking the other day, youknow, of his being so warm an admirer of her performance]
 ["Yes, and what you told me on that head, confirmed an idea which I hadentertained before.--I do not mean to reflect upon the good intentionsof either Mr. Dixon or Miss Fairfax, but I cannot help suspecting eitherthat, after making his proposals to her friend, he had the misfortuneto fall in love with _her_, or that he became conscious of a littleattachment on her side. One might guess twenty things without guessingexactly the right; but I am sure there must be a particular cause forher chusing to come to Highbury instead of going with the Campbellsto Ireland. Here, she must be leading a life of privation and penance;there it would have been all enjoyment. As to the pretence of trying hernative air, I look upon that as a mere excuse.--In the summer it mighthave passed; but what can any body's native air do for them in themonths of January, February, and March? Good fires and carriages wouldbe much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate health, and I daresay in her's. I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions, thoughyou make so noble a profession of doing it, but I honestly tell you whatthey are]
 ["And, upon my word, they have an air of great probability. Mr. Dixon'spreference of her music to her friend's, I can answer for being verydecided]
 ["And then, he saved her life. Did you ever hear of that?--A waterparty; and by some accident she was falling overboard. He caught her]
 ["He did. I was there--one of the party]
 ["Were you really?--Well!--But you observed nothing of course, for itseems to be a new idea to you.--If I had been there, I think I shouldhave made some discoveries]
 ["I dare say you would; but I, simple I, saw nothing but the fact, thatMiss Fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that Mr. Dixon caughther.--It was the work of a moment. And though the consequent shock andalarm was very great and much more durable--indeed I believe it washalf an hour before any of us were comfortable again--yet that was toogeneral a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to beobservable. I do not mean to say, however, that you might not have madediscoveries]
 [The conversation was here interrupted. They were called on to sharein the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses, andobliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others; but when the tablewas again safely covered, when every corner dish was placed exactlyright, and occupation and ease were generally restored, Emma said,"The arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me. I wanted to knowa little more, and this tells me quite enough. Depend upon it, we shallsoon hear that it is a present from Mr. and Mrs. Dixon]
 ["And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we mustconclude it to come from the Campbells]
 ["No, I am sure it is not from the Campbells. Miss Fairfax knows it isnot from the Campbells, or they would have been guessed at first. Shewould not have been puzzled, had she dared fix on them. I may not haveconvinced you perhaps, but I am perfectly convinced myself that Mr.Dixon is a principal in the business]
 ["Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced. Your reasoningscarry my judgment along with them entirely. At first, while I supposedyou satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver, I saw it only aspaternal kindness, and thought it the most natural thing in the world.But when you mentioned Mrs. Dixon, I felt how much more probable that itshould be the tribute of warm female friendship. And now I can see it inno other light than as an offering of love]
 [There was no occasion to press the matter farther. The conviction seemedreal; he looked as if he felt it. She said no more, other subjectstook their turn; and the rest of the dinner passed away; the dessertsucceeded, the children came in, and were talked to and admired amid theusual rate of conversation; a few clever things said, a few downrightsilly, but by much the larger proportion neither the one nor theother--nothing worse than everyday remarks, dull repetitions, old news,and heavy jokes.The ladies had not been long in the drawing-room, before the otherladies, in their different divisions, arrived. Emma watched the entreeof her own particular little friend; and if she could not exult in herdignity and grace, she could not only love the blooming sweetness andthe artless manner, but could most heartily rejoice in that light,cheerful, unsentimental disposition which allowed her so manyalleviations of pleasure, in the midst of the pangs of disappointedaffection. There she sat--and who would have guessed how many tears shehad been lately shedding? To be in company, nicely dressed herself andseeing others nicely dressed, to sit and smile and look pretty, and saynothing, was enough for the happiness of the present hour. Jane Fairfaxdid look and move superior; but Emma suspected she might have beenglad to change feelings with Harriet, very glad to have purchased themortification of having loved--yes, of having loved even Mr. Elton invain--by the surrender of all the dangerous pleasure of knowing herselfbeloved by the husband of her friend.In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her.She did not wish to speak of the pianoforte, she felt too much in thesecret herself, to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair,and therefore purposely kept at a distance; but by the others, thesubject was almost immediately introduced, and she saw the blush ofconsciousness with which congratulations were received, the blushof guilt which accompanied the name of "my excellent friend ColonelCampbell]
 [Mrs. Weston, kind-hearted and musical, was particularly interestedby the circumstance, and Emma could not help being amused at herperseverance in dwelling on the subject; and having so much to ask andto say as to tone, touch, and pedal, totally unsuspicious of that wishof saying as little about it as possible, which she plainly read in thefair heroine's countenance.They were soon joined by some of the gentlemen; and the very firstof the early was Frank Churchill. In he walked, the first and thehandsomest; and after paying his compliments en passant to Miss Batesand her niece, made his way directly to the opposite side of the circle,where sat Miss Woodhouse; and till he could find a seat by her, wouldnot sit at all. Emma divined what every body present must be thinking.She was his object, and every body must perceive it. She introduced himto her friend, Miss Smith, and, at convenient moments afterwards, heardwhat each thought of the other. "He had never seen so lovely a face, andwas delighted with her naivete]
 [ And she, "Only to be sure it was payinghim too great a compliment, but she did think there were some looks alittle like Mr. Elton]
 [ Emma restrained her indignation, and only turnedfrom her in silence.Smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentleman on firstglancing towards Miss Fairfax; but it was most prudent to avoid speech.He told her that he had been impatient to leave the dining-room--hatedsitting long--was always the first to move when he could--that hisfather, Mr. Knightley, Mr. Cox, and Mr. Cole, were left very busy overparish business--that as long as he had staid, however, it had beenpleasant enough, as he had found them in general a set of gentlemanlike,sensible men; and spoke so handsomely of Highbury altogether--thought itso abundant in agreeable families--that Emma began to feel she had beenused to despise the place rather too much. She questioned him as to thesociety in Yorkshire--the extent of the neighbourhood about Enscombe,and the sort; and could make out from his answers that, as far asEnscombe was concerned, there was very little going on, that theirvisitings were among a range of great families, none very near; andthat even when days were fixed, and invitations accepted, it was an evenchance that Mrs. Churchill were not in health and spirits for going;that they made a point of visiting no fresh person; and that, thoughhe had his separate engagements, it was not without difficulty, withoutconsiderable address _at_ _times_, that he could get away, or introducean acquaintance for a night.She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that Highbury, taken atits best, might reasonably please a young man who had more retirement athome than he liked. His importance at Enscombe was very evident. He didnot boast, but it naturally betrayed itself, that he had persuaded hisaunt where his uncle could do nothing, and on her laughing and noticingit, he owned that he believed (excepting one or two points) he could_with_ _time_ persuade her to any thing. One of those points on whichhis influence failed, he then mentioned. He had wanted very much togo abroad--had been very eager indeed to be allowed to travel--but shewould not hear of it. This had happened the year before. _Now_, he said,he was beginning to have no longer the same wish.The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention, Emma guessed to begood behaviour to his father]
 [I have made a most wretched discovery," said he, after a short pause.--"I have been here a week to-morrow--half my time. I never knew days flyso fast. A week to-morrow!--And I have hardly begun to enjoy myself.But just got acquainted with Mrs. Weston, and others!--I hate therecollection]
 ["Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day, outof so few, in having your hair cut]
 ["No," said he, smiling, "that is no subject of regret at all. I haveno pleasure in seeing my friends, unless I can believe myself fit to beseen]
 [The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room, Emma found herselfobliged to turn from him for a few minutes, and listen to Mr. Cole. WhenMr. Cole had moved away, and her attention could be restored as before,she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room at MissFairfax, who was sitting exactly opposite]
 [What is the matter?" said she.He started. "Thank you for rousing me," he replied. "I believe I havebeen very rude; but really Miss Fairfax has done her hair in so odd away--so very odd a way--that I cannot keep my eyes from her. I never sawany thing so outree!--Those curls!--This must be a fancy of her own. Isee nobody else looking like her!--I must go and ask her whether itis an Irish fashion. Shall I?--Yes, I will--I declare I will--and youshall see how she takes it;--whether she colours]
 [He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him standing before MissFairfax, and talking to her; but as to its effect on the young lady,as he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them, exactly infront of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing.Before he could return to his chair, it was taken by Mrs. Weston]
 [This is the luxury of a large party," said she:--"one can get nearevery body, and say every thing. My dear Emma, I am longing to talkto you. I have been making discoveries and forming plans, just likeyourself, and I must tell them while the idea is fresh. Do you know howMiss Bates and her niece came here?""How?--They were invited, were not they?""Oh! yes--but how they were conveyed hither?--the manner of theircoming?""They walked, I conclude. How else could they come?""Very true.--Well, a little while ago it occurred to me how very sadit would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again, late at night, andcold as the nights are now. And as I looked at her, though I never sawher appear to more advantage, it struck me that she was heated, andwould therefore be particularly liable to take cold. Poor girl! I couldnot bear the idea of it; so, as soon as Mr. Weston came into the room,and I could get at him, I spoke to him about the carriage. You may guesshow readily he came into my wishes; and having his approbation, I mademy way directly to Miss Bates, to assure her that the carriage would beat her service before it took us home; for I thought it would be makingher comfortable at once. Good soul! she was as grateful as possible, youmay be sure. 'Nobody was ever so fortunate as herself!'--but with many,many thanks--'there was no occasion to trouble us, for Mr. Knightley'scarriage had brought, and was to take them home again]
 [ I was quitesurprized;--very glad, I am sure; but really quite surprized. Such avery kind attention--and so thoughtful an attention!--the sort of thingthat so few men would think of. And, in short, from knowing hisusual ways, I am very much inclined to think that it was for theiraccommodation the carriage was used at all. I do suspect he would nothave had a pair of horses for himself, and that it was only as an excusefor assisting them]
 ["Very likely," said Emma--"nothing more likely. I know no man morelikely than Mr. Knightley to do the sort of thing--to do any thingreally good-natured, useful, considerate, or benevolent. He is not agallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this, considering JaneFairfax's ill-health, would appear a case of humanity to him;--and foran act of unostentatious kindness, there is nobody whom I would fix onmore than on Mr. Knightley. I know he had horses to-day--for we arrivedtogether; and I laughed at him about it, but he said not a word thatcould betray]
 ["Well," said Mrs. Weston, smiling, "you give him credit for more simple,disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do; for while MissBates was speaking, a suspicion darted into my head, and I have neverbeen able to get it out again. The more I think of it, the more probableit appears. In short, I have made a match between Mr. Knightley and JaneFairfax. See the consequence of keeping you company!--What do you say toit?""Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax!" exclaimed Emma. "Dear Mrs. Weston, howcould you think of such a thing?--Mr. Knightley!--Mr. Knightley must notmarry!--You would not have little Henry cut out from Donwell?--Oh! no,no, Henry must have Donwell. I cannot at all consent to Mr. Knightley'smarrying; and I am sure it is not at all likely. I am amazed that youshould think of such a thing]
 ["My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of it. I do not wantthe match--I do not want to injure dear little Henry--but the idea hasbeen given me by circumstances; and if Mr. Knightley really wished tomarry, you would not have him refrain on Henry's account, a boy of sixyears old, who knows nothing of the matter?""Yes, I would. I could not bear to have Henry supplanted.--Mr.Knightley marry!--No, I have never had such an idea, and I cannot adoptit now. And Jane Fairfax, too, of all women!""Nay, she has always been a first favourite with him, as you very wellknow]
 ["But the imprudence of such a match!""I am not speaking of its prudence; merely its probability]
 ["I see no probability in it, unless you have any better foundation thanwhat you mention. His good-nature, his humanity, as I tell you, wouldbe quite enough to account for the horses. He has a great regard for theBateses, you know, independent of Jane Fairfax--and is always glad toshew them attention. My dear Mrs. Weston, do not take to match-making.You do it very ill. Jane Fairfax mistress of the Abbey!--Oh! no,no;--every feeling revolts. For his own sake, I would not have him do somad a thing]
 ["Imprudent, if you please--but not mad. Excepting inequality of fortune,and perhaps a little disparity of age, I can see nothing unsuitable]
 ["But Mr. Knightley does not want to marry. I am sure he has not theleast idea of it. Do not put it into his head. Why should he marry?--Heis as happy as possible by himself; with his farm, and his sheep, andhis library, and all the parish to manage; and he is extremely fond ofhis brother's children. He has no occasion to marry, either to fill uphis time or his heart]
 ["My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so; but if he really lovesJane Fairfax--""Nonsense! He does not care about Jane Fairfax. In the way of love, I amsure he does not. He would do any good to her, or her family; but--""Well," said Mrs. Weston, laughing, "perhaps the greatest good he coulddo them, would be to give Jane such a respectable home]
 ["If it would be good to her, I am sure it would be evil to himself; avery shameful and degrading connexion. How would he bear to have MissBates belonging to him?--To have her haunting the Abbey, and thankinghim all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane?--'So verykind and obliging!--But he always had been such a very kind neighbour!'And then fly off, through half a sentence, to her mother's oldpetticoat. 'Not that it was such a very old petticoat either--for stillit would last a great while--and, indeed, she must thankfully say thattheir petticoats were all very strong]
 [""For shame, Emma! Do not mimic her. You divert me against my conscience.And, upon my word, I do not think Mr. Knightley would be much disturbedby Miss Bates. Little things do not irritate him. She might talk on; andif he wanted to say any thing himself, he would only talk louder, anddrown her voice. But the question is not, whether it would be a badconnexion for him, but whether he wishes it; and I think he does. I haveheard him speak, and so must you, so very highly of Jane Fairfax! Theinterest he takes in her--his anxiety about her health--his concern thatshe should have no happier prospect! I have heard him express himselfso warmly on those points!--Such an admirer of her performance on thepianoforte, and of her voice! I have heard him say that he could listento her for ever. Oh! and I had almost forgotten one idea that occurredto me--this pianoforte that has been sent here by somebody--thoughwe have all been so well satisfied to consider it a present from theCampbells, may it not be from Mr. Knightley? I cannot help suspectinghim. I think he is just the person to do it, even without being inlove]
 ["Then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love. But I do notthink it is at all a likely thing for him to do. Mr. Knightley doesnothing mysteriously]
 ["I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly; oftenerthan I should suppose such a circumstance would, in the common course ofthings, occur to him]
 ["Very well; and if he had intended to give her one, he would have toldher so]
 ["There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma. I have a very strongnotion that it comes from him. I am sure he was particularly silent whenMrs. Cole told us of it at dinner]
 ["You take up an idea, Mrs. Weston, and run away with it; as you havemany a time reproached me with doing. I see no sign of attachment--Ibelieve nothing of the pianoforte--and proof only shall convince me thatMr. Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax]
 [They combated the point some time longer in the same way; Emma rathergaining ground over the mind of her friend; for Mrs. Weston was the mostused of the two to yield; till a little bustle in the room shewed themthat tea was over, and the instrument in preparation;--and at the samemoment Mr. Cole approaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do them thehonour of trying it. Frank Churchill, of whom, in the eagerness of herconversation with Mrs. Weston, she had been seeing nothing, except thathe had found a seat by Miss Fairfax, followed Mr. Cole, to add his verypressing entreaties; and as, in every respect, it suited Emma best tolead, she gave a very proper compliance.She knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attempt more thanshe could perform with credit; she wanted neither taste nor spirit inthe little things which are generally acceptable, and could accompanyher own voice well. One accompaniment to her song took her agreeably bysurprize--a second, slightly but correctly taken by Frank Churchill. Herpardon was duly begged at the close of the song, and every thing usualfollowed. He was accused of having a delightful voice, and a perfectknowledge of music; which was properly denied; and that he knew nothingof the matter, and had no voice at all, roundly asserted. They sangtogether once more; and Emma would then resign her place to MissFairfax, whose performance, both vocal and instrumental, she never couldattempt to conceal from herself, was infinitely superior to her own.With mixed feelings, she seated herself at a little distance from thenumbers round the instrument, to listen. Frank Churchill sang again.They had sung together once or twice, it appeared, at Weymouth. But thesight of Mr. Knightley among the most attentive, soon drew away halfEmma's mind; and she fell into a train of thinking on the subject ofMrs. Weston's suspicions, to which the sweet sounds of the united voicesgave only momentary interruptions. Her objections to Mr. Knightley'smarrying did not in the least subside. She could see nothing but evilin it. It would be a great disappointment to Mr. John Knightley;consequently to Isabella. A real injury to the children--a mostmortifying change, and material loss to them all;--a very greatdeduction from her father's daily comfort--and, as to herself, she couldnot at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey. A Mrs.Knightley for them all to give way to!--No--Mr. Knightley must nevermarry. Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell.Presently Mr. Knightley looked back, and came and sat down by her. Theytalked at first only of the performance. His admiration was certainlyvery warm; yet she thought, but for Mrs. Weston, it would not havestruck her. As a sort of touchstone, however, she began to speak of hiskindness in conveying the aunt and niece; and though his answer was inthe spirit of cutting the matter short, she believed it to indicate onlyhis disinclination to dwell on any kindness of his own]
 [I often feel concern," said she, "that I dare not make our carriagemore useful on such occasions. It is not that I am without the wish; butyou know how impossible my father would deem it that James should put-tofor such a purpose]
 ["Quite out of the question, quite out of the question," hereplied;--"but you must often wish it, I am sure]
 [ And he smiled withsuch seeming pleasure at the conviction, that she must proceed anotherstep]
 [This present from the Campbells," said she--"this pianoforte is verykindly given]
 ["Yes," he replied, and without the smallest apparentembarrassment.--"But they would have done better had they givenher notice of it. Surprizes are foolish things. The pleasure is notenhanced, and the inconvenience is often considerable. I should haveexpected better judgment in Colonel Campbell]
 [From that moment, Emma could have taken her oath that Mr. Knightley hadhad no concern in giving the instrument. But whether he wereentirely free from peculiar attachment--whether there were no actualpreference--remained a little longer doubtful. Towards the end of Jane'ssecond song, her voice grew thick]
 [That will do," said he, when it was finished, thinking aloud--"you havesung quite enough for one evening--now be quiet]
 [Another song, however, was soon begged for. "One more;--they would notfatigue Miss Fairfax on any account, and would only ask for one more]
 [And Frank Churchill was heard to say, "I think you could manage thiswithout effort; the first part is so very trifling. The strength of thesong falls on the second]
 [Mr. Knightley grew angry]
 [That fellow," said he, indignantly, "thinks of nothing but shewing offhis own voice. This must not be]
 [ And touching Miss Bates, who at thatmoment passed near--"Miss Bates, are you mad, to let your niece singherself hoarse in this manner? Go, and interfere. They have no mercy onher]
 [Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly stay even tobe grateful, before she stept forward and put an end to all farthersinging. Here ceased the concert part of the evening, for Miss Woodhouseand Miss Fairfax were the only young lady performers; but soon (withinfive minutes) the proposal of dancing--originating nobody exactly knewwhere--was so effectually promoted by Mr. and Mrs. Cole, that everything was rapidly clearing away, to give proper space. Mrs. Weston,capital in her country-dances, was seated, and beginning an irresistiblewaltz; and Frank Churchill, coming up with most becoming gallantry toEmma, had secured her hand, and led her up to the top.While waiting till the other young people could pair themselves off,Emma found time, in spite of the compliments she was receiving onher voice and her taste, to look about, and see what became of Mr.Knightley. This would be a trial. He was no dancer in general. If hewere to be very alert in engaging Jane Fairfax now, it might augursomething. There was no immediate appearance. No; he was talking to Mrs.Cole--he was looking on unconcerned; Jane was asked by somebody else,and he was still talking to Mrs. Cole.Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry; his interest was yet safe; andshe led off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment. Not more thanfive couple could be mustered; but the rarity and the suddenness ofit made it very delightful, and she found herself well matched in apartner. They were a couple worth looking at.Two dances, unfortunately, were all that could be allowed. It wasgrowing late, and Miss Bates became anxious to get home, on her mother'saccount. After some attempts, therefore, to be permitted to begin again,they were obliged to thank Mrs. Weston, look sorrowful, and have done]
 [Perhaps it is as well," said Frank Churchill, as he attended Emma toher carriage. "I must have asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid dancingwould not have agreed with me, after yours]
 [CHAPTER IXEmma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles. The visitafforded her many pleasant recollections the next day; and all that shemight be supposed to have lost on the side of dignified seclusion, mustbe amply repaid in the splendour of popularity. She must have delightedthe Coles--worthy people, who deserved to be made happy!--And left aname behind her that would not soon die away.Perfect happiness, even in memory, is not common; and there were twopoints on which she was not quite easy. She doubted whether she had nottransgressed the duty of woman by woman, in betraying her suspicions ofJane Fairfax's feelings to Frank Churchill. It was hardly right; but ithad been so strong an idea, that it would escape her, and his submissionto all that she told, was a compliment to her penetration, which madeit difficult for her to be quite certain that she ought to have held hertongue.The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane Fairfax; andthere she had no doubt. She did unfeignedly and unequivocally regret theinferiority of her own playing and singing. She did most heartilygrieve over the idleness of her childhood--and sat down and practisedvigorously an hour and a half.She was then interrupted by Harriet's coming in; and if Harriet's praisecould have satisfied her, she might soon have been comforted]
 [Oh! if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax!""Don't class us together, Harriet. My playing is no more like her's,than a lamp is like sunshine]
 ["Oh! dear--I think you play the best of the two. I think you play quiteas well as she does. I am sure I had much rather hear you. Every bodylast night said how well you played]
 ["Those who knew any thing about it, must have felt the difference. Thetruth is, Harriet, that my playing is just good enough to be praised,but Jane Fairfax's is much beyond it]
 ["Well, I always shall think that you play quite as well as she does, orthat if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out. Mr. Colesaid how much taste you had; and Mr. Frank Churchill talked a great dealabout your taste, and that he valued taste much more than execution]
 ["Ah! but Jane Fairfax has them both, Harriet]
 ["Are you sure? I saw she had execution, but I did not know she had anytaste. Nobody talked about it. And I hate Italian singing.--There is nounderstanding a word of it. Besides, if she does play so very well, youknow, it is no more than she is obliged to do, because she will have toteach. The Coxes were wondering last night whether she would get intoany great family. How did you think the Coxes looked?""Just as they always do--very vulgar]
 ["They told me something," said Harriet rather hesitatingly; "but it isnothing of any consequence]
 [Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her, though fearful of itsproducing Mr. Elton]
 [They told me--that Mr. Martin dined with them last Saturday]
 ["Oh!""He came to their father upon some business, and he asked him to stay todinner]
 ["Oh!""They talked a great deal about him, especially Anne Cox. I do not knowwhat she meant, but she asked me if I thought I should go and stay thereagain next summer]
 ["She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such an Anne Cox shouldbe]
 ["She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there. He sat by her atdinner. Miss Nash thinks either of the Coxes would be very glad to marryhim]
 ["Very likely.--I think they are, without exception, the most vulgargirls in Highbury]
 [Harriet had business at Ford's.--Emma thought it most prudent to go withher. Another accidental meeting with the Martins was possible, and inher present state, would be dangerous.Harriet, tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word, was alwaysvery long at a purchase; and while she was still hanging over muslinsand changing her mind, Emma went to the door for amusement.--Much couldnot be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury;--Mr.Perry walking hastily by, Mr. William Cox letting himself in at theoffice-door, Mr. Cole's carriage-horses returning from exercise, or astray letter-boy on an obstinate mule, were the liveliest objects shecould presume to expect; and when her eyes fell only on the butcher withhis tray, a tidy old woman travelling homewards from shop with her fullbasket, two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone, and a string of dawdlingchildren round the baker's little bow-window eyeing the gingerbread, sheknew she had no reason to complain, and was amused enough; quite enoughstill to stand at the door. A mind lively and at ease, can do withseeing nothing, and can see nothing that does not answer.She looked down the Randalls road. The scene enlarged; two personsappeared; Mrs. Weston and her son-in-law; they were walking intoHighbury;--to Hartfield of course. They were stopping, however, in thefirst place at Mrs. Bates's; whose house was a little nearerRandalls than Ford's; and had all but knocked, when Emma caught theireye.--Immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her; and theagreeableness of yesterday's engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure tothe present meeting. Mrs. Weston informed her that she was going to callon the Bateses, in order to hear the new instrument]
 [For my companion tells me," said she, "that I absolutely promised MissBates last night, that I would come this morning. I was not aware of itmyself. I did not know that I had fixed a day, but as he says I did, Iam going now]
 ["And while Mrs. Weston pays her visit, I may be allowed, I hope," saidFrank Churchill, "to join your party and wait for her at Hartfield--ifyou are going home]
 [Mrs. Weston was disappointed]
 [I thought you meant to go with me. They would be very much pleased]
 ["Me! I should be quite in the way. But, perhaps--I may be equally in theway here. Miss Woodhouse looks as if she did not want me. My aunt alwayssends me off when she is shopping. She says I fidget her to death; andMiss Woodhouse looks as if she could almost say the same. What am I todo?""I am here on no business of my own," said Emma; "I am only waiting formy friend. She will probably have soon done, and then we shall go home.But you had better go with Mrs. Weston and hear the instrument]
 ["Well--if you advise it.--But (with a smile) if Colonel Campbell shouldhave employed a careless friend, and if it should prove to have anindifferent tone--what shall I say? I shall be no support to Mrs.Weston. She might do very well by herself. A disagreeable truth would bepalatable through her lips, but I am the wretchedest being in the worldat a civil falsehood]
 ["I do not believe any such thing," replied Emma.--"I am persuaded thatyou can be as insincere as your neighbours, when it is necessary; butthere is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent. Quiteotherwise indeed, if I understood Miss Fairfax's opinion last night]
 ["Do come with me," said Mrs. Weston, "if it be not very disagreeable toyou. It need not detain us long. We will go to Hartfield afterwards.We will follow them to Hartfield. I really wish you to call with me. Itwill be felt so great an attention! and I always thought you meant it]
 [He could say no more; and with the hope of Hartfield to reward him,returned with Mrs. Weston to Mrs. Bates's door. Emma watched them in,and then joined Harriet at the interesting counter,--trying, with allthe force of her own mind, to convince her that if she wanted plainmuslin it was of no use to look at figured; and that a blue ribbon, beit ever so beautiful, would still never match her yellow pattern. Atlast it was all settled, even to the destination of the parcel]
 [Should I send it to Mrs. Goddard's, ma'am?" asked Mrs.Ford.--"Yes--no--yes, to Mrs. Goddard's. Only my pattern gown is atHartfield. No, you shall send it to Hartfield, if you please. But then,Mrs. Goddard will want to see it.--And I could take the pattern gownhome any day. But I shall want the ribbon directly--so it had better goto Hartfield--at least the ribbon. You could make it into two parcels,Mrs. Ford, could not you?""It is not worth while, Harriet, to give Mrs. Ford the trouble of twoparcels]
 ["No more it is]
 ["No trouble in the world, ma'am," said the obliging Mrs. Ford]
 [Oh! but indeed I would much rather have it only in one. Then, if youplease, you shall send it all to Mrs. Goddard's--I do not know--No, Ithink, Miss Woodhouse, I may just as well have it sent to Hartfield, andtake it home with me at night. What do you advise?""That you do not give another half-second to the subject. To Hartfield,if you please, Mrs. Ford]
 ["Aye, that will be much best," said Harriet, quite satisfied, "I shouldnot at all like to have it sent to Mrs. Goddard's]
 [Voices approached the shop--or rather one voice and two ladies: Mrs.Weston and Miss Bates met them at the door]
 [My dear Miss Woodhouse," said the latter, "I am just run across toentreat the favour of you to come and sit down with us a little while,and give us your opinion of our new instrument; you and Miss Smith. Howdo you do, Miss Smith?--Very well I thank you.--And I begged Mrs. Westonto come with me, that I might be sure of succeeding]
 ["I hope Mrs. Bates and Miss Fairfax are--""Very well, I am much obliged to you. My mother is delightfully well;and Jane caught no cold last night. How is Mr. Woodhouse?--I am so gladto hear such a good account. Mrs. Weston told me you were here.--Oh!then, said I, I must run across, I am sure Miss Woodhouse will allow mejust to run across and entreat her to come in; my mother will be sovery happy to see her--and now we are such a nice party, she cannotrefuse.--'Aye, pray do,' said Mr. Frank Churchill, 'Miss Woodhouse'sopinion of the instrument will be worth having]
 [--But, said I, I shallbe more sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me.--'Oh,' saidhe, 'wait half a minute, till I have finished my job;'--For, would youbelieve it, Miss Woodhouse, there he is, in the most obliging manner inthe world, fastening in the rivet of my mother's spectacles.--The rivetcame out, you know, this morning.--So very obliging!--For my mother hadno use of her spectacles--could not put them on. And, by the bye, everybody ought to have two pair of spectacles; they should indeed. Jane saidso. I meant to take them over to John Saunders the first thing I did,but something or other hindered me all the morning; first one thing,then another, there is no saying what, you know. At one time Patty cameto say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping. Oh, said I,Patty do not come with your bad news to me. Here is the rivet of yourmistress's spectacles out. Then the baked apples came home, Mrs. Wallissent them by her boy; they are extremely civil and obliging to us, theWallises, always--I have heard some people say that Mrs. Wallis can beuncivil and give a very rude answer, but we have never known any thingbut the greatest attention from them. And it cannot be for the valueof our custom now, for what is our consumption of bread, you know?Only three of us.--besides dear Jane at present--and she really eatsnothing--makes such a shocking breakfast, you would be quite frightenedif you saw it. I dare not let my mother know how little she eats--so Isay one thing and then I say another, and it passes off. But about themiddle of the day she gets hungry, and there is nothing she likes sowell as these baked apples, and they are extremely wholesome, for I tookthe opportunity the other day of asking Mr. Perry; I happened to meethim in the street. Not that I had any doubt before--I have so oftenheard Mr. Woodhouse recommend a baked apple. I believe it is the onlyway that Mr. Woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly wholesome. Wehave apple-dumplings, however, very often. Patty makes an excellentapple-dumpling. Well, Mrs. Weston, you have prevailed, I hope, and theseladies will oblige us]
 [Emma would be "very happy to wait on Mrs. Bates, &c.," and they did atlast move out of the shop, with no farther delay from Miss Bates than,"How do you do, Mrs. Ford? I beg your pardon. I did not see you before.I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbons from town. Janecame back delighted yesterday. Thank ye, the gloves do very well--only alittle too large about the wrist; but Jane is taking them in]
 ["What was I talking of?" said she, beginning again when they were all inthe street.Emma wondered on what, of all the medley, she would fix]
 [I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking of.--Oh! my mother'sspectacles. So very obliging of Mr. Frank Churchill! 'Oh!' said he,'I do think I can fasten the rivet; I like a job of this kindexcessively]
 [--Which you know shewed him to be so very.... Indeed I mustsay that, much as I had heard of him before and much as I had expected,he very far exceeds any thing.... I do congratulate you, Mrs. Weston,most warmly. He seems every thing the fondest parent could...]
 [Oh!' said he, 'I can fasten the rivet. I like a job of that sortexcessively]
 [ I never shall forget his manner. And when I brought outthe baked apples from the closet, and hoped our friends would be so veryobliging as to take some, 'Oh!' said he directly, 'there is nothingin the way of fruit half so good, and these are the finest-lookinghome-baked apples I ever saw in my life]
 [ That, you know, was sovery.... And I am sure, by his manner, it was no compliment. Indeed theyare very delightful apples, and Mrs. Wallis does them full justice--onlywe do not have them baked more than twice, and Mr. Woodhouse made uspromise to have them done three times--but Miss Woodhouse will be sogood as not to mention it. The apples themselves are the very finestsort for baking, beyond a doubt; all from Donwell--some of Mr.Knightley's most liberal supply. He sends us a sack every year; andcertainly there never was such a keeping apple anywhere as one of histrees--I believe there is two of them. My mother says the orchard wasalways famous in her younger days. But I was really quite shocked theother day--for Mr. Knightley called one morning, and Jane was eatingthese apples, and we talked about them and said how much she enjoyedthem, and he asked whether we were not got to the end of our stock. 'Iam sure you must be,' said he, 'and I will send you another supply; forI have a great many more than I can ever use. William Larkins let mekeep a larger quantity than usual this year. I will send you some more,before they get good for nothing]
 [ So I begged he would not--for reallyas to ours being gone, I could not absolutely say that we had a greatmany left--it was but half a dozen indeed; but they should be all keptfor Jane; and I could not at all bear that he should be sending us more,so liberal as he had been already; and Jane said the same. And whenhe was gone, she almost quarrelled with me--No, I should not sayquarrelled, for we never had a quarrel in our lives; but she was quitedistressed that I had owned the apples were so nearly gone; she wishedI had made him believe we had a great many left. Oh, said I, my dear,I did say as much as I could. However, the very same evening WilliamLarkins came over with a large basket of apples, the same sort ofapples, a bushel at least, and I was very much obliged, and went downand spoke to William Larkins and said every thing, as you may suppose.William Larkins is such an old acquaintance! I am always glad to seehim. But, however, I found afterwards from Patty, that William said itwas all the apples of _that_ sort his master had; he had brought themall--and now his master had not one left to bake or boil. William didnot seem to mind it himself, he was so pleased to think his master hadsold so many; for William, you know, thinks more of his master's profitthan any thing; but Mrs. Hodges, he said, was quite displeased at theirbeing all sent away. She could not bear that her master should not beable to have another apple-tart this spring. He told Patty this, but bidher not mind it, and be sure not to say any thing to us about it, forMrs. Hodges _would_ be cross sometimes, and as long as so many sackswere sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder. And so Patty toldme, and I was excessively shocked indeed! I would not have Mr. Knightleyknow any thing about it for the world! He would be so very.... I wantedto keep it from Jane's knowledge; but, unluckily, I had mentioned itbefore I was aware]
 [Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door; and her visitorswalked upstairs without having any regular narration to attend to,pursued only by the sounds of her desultory good-will]
 [Pray take care, Mrs. Weston, there is a step at the turning. Pray takecare, Miss Woodhouse, ours is rather a dark staircase--rather darkerand narrower than one could wish. Miss Smith, pray take care. MissWoodhouse, I am quite concerned, I am sure you hit your foot. MissSmith, the step at the turning]
 [CHAPTER XThe appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered, wastranquillity itself; Mrs. Bates, deprived of her usual employment,slumbering on one side of the fire, Frank Churchill, at a table nearher, most deedily occupied about her spectacles, and Jane Fairfax,standing with her back to them, intent on her pianoforte.Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet able to shew a most happycountenance on seeing Emma again]
 [This is a pleasure," said he, in rather a low voice, "coming at leastten minutes earlier than I had calculated. You find me trying to beuseful; tell me if you think I shall succeed]
 ["What!" said Mrs. Weston, "have not you finished it yet? you would notearn a very good livelihood as a working silversmith at this rate]
 ["I have not been working uninterruptedly," he replied, "I have beenassisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadily,it was not quite firm; an unevenness in the floor, I believe. You seewe have been wedging one leg with paper. This was very kind of you to bepersuaded to come. I was almost afraid you would be hurrying home]
 [He contrived that she should be seated by him; and was sufficientlyemployed in looking out the best baked apple for her, and trying to makeher help or advise him in his work, till Jane Fairfax was quite readyto sit down to the pianoforte again. That she was not immediately ready,Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves; she had not yetpossessed the instrument long enough to touch it without emotion; shemust reason herself into the power of performance; and Emma could notbut pity such feelings, whatever their origin, and could not but resolvenever to expose them to her neighbour again.At last Jane began, and though the first bars were feebly given, thepowers of the instrument were gradually done full justice to. Mrs.Weston had been delighted before, and was delighted again; Emmajoined her in all her praise; and the pianoforte, with every properdiscrimination, was pronounced to be altogether of the highest promise]
 [Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ," said Frank Churchill, with asmile at Emma, "the person has not chosen ill. I heard a good deal ofColonel Campbell's taste at Weymouth; and the softness of the uppernotes I am sure is exactly what he and _all_ _that_ _party_ wouldparticularly prize. I dare say, Miss Fairfax, that he either gave hisfriend very minute directions, or wrote to Broadwood himself. Do not youthink so?"Jane did not look round. She was not obliged to hear. Mrs. Weston hadbeen speaking to her at the same moment]
 [It is not fair," said Emma, in a whisper; "mine was a random guess. Donot distress her]
 [He shook his head with a smile, and looked as if he had very littledoubt and very little mercy. Soon afterwards he began again,"How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on thisoccasion, Miss Fairfax. I dare say they often think of you, and wonderwhich will be the day, the precise day of the instrument's coming tohand. Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to be goingforward just at this time?--Do you imagine it to be the consequenceof an immediate commission from him, or that he may have sent onlya general direction, an order indefinite as to time, to depend uponcontingencies and conveniences?"He paused. She could not but hear; she could not avoid answering,"Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell," said she, in a voice offorced calmness, "I can imagine nothing with any confidence. It must beall conjecture]
 ["Conjecture--aye, sometimes one conjectures right, and sometimes oneconjectures wrong. I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make thisrivet quite firm. What nonsense one talks, Miss Woodhouse, when hardat work, if one talks at all;--your real workmen, I suppose, hold theirtongues; but we gentlemen labourers if we get hold of a word--MissFairfax said something about conjecturing. There, it is done. I have thepleasure, madam, (to Mrs. Bates,) of restoring your spectacles, healedfor the present]
 [He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter; to escape alittle from the latter, he went to the pianoforte, and begged MissFairfax, who was still sitting at it, to play something more]
 [If you are very kind," said he, "it will be one of the waltzes wedanced last night;--let me live them over again. You did not enjoy themas I did; you appeared tired the whole time. I believe you were glad wedanced no longer; but I would have given worlds--all the worlds one everhas to give--for another half-hour]
 [She played]
 [What felicity it is to hear a tune again which _has_ made onehappy!--If I mistake not that was danced at Weymouth]
 [She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply, and played somethingelse. He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte, and turningto Emma, said,"Here is something quite new to me. Do you know it?--Cramer.--And hereare a new set of Irish melodies. That, from such a quarter, one mightexpect. This was all sent with the instrument. Very thoughtful ofColonel Campbell, was not it?--He knew Miss Fairfax could have no musichere. I honour that part of the attention particularly; it shews it tohave been so thoroughly from the heart. Nothing hastily done; nothingincomplete. True affection only could have prompted it]
 [Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not help being amused;and when on glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught the remainsof a smile, when she saw that with all the deep blush of consciousness,there had been a smile of secret delight, she had less scruple in theamusement, and much less compunction with respect to her.--Thisamiable, upright, perfect Jane Fairfax was apparently cherishing veryreprehensible feelings.He brought all the music to her, and they looked it over together.--Emmatook the opportunity of whispering,"You speak too plain. She must understand you]
 ["I hope she does. I would have her understand me. I am not in the leastashamed of my meaning]
 ["But really, I am half ashamed, and wish I had never taken up the idea]
 ["I am very glad you did, and that you communicated it to me. I have nowa key to all her odd looks and ways. Leave shame to her. If she doeswrong, she ought to feel it]
 ["She is not entirely without it, I think]
 ["I do not see much sign of it. She is playing _Robin_ _Adair_ at thismoment--_his_ favourite]
 [Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, passing near the window, descried Mr.Knightley on horse-back not far off]
 [Mr. Knightley I declare!--I must speak to him if possible, just tothank him. I will not open the window here; it would give you all cold;but I can go into my mother's room you know. I dare say he will comein when he knows who is here. Quite delightful to have you all meetso!--Our little room so honoured!"She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke, and opening thecasement there, immediately called Mr. Knightley's attention, and everysyllable of their conversation was as distinctly heard by the others, asif it had passed within the same apartment]
 [How d' ye do?--how d'ye do?--Very well, I thank you. So obliged to youfor the carriage last night. We were just in time; my mother just readyfor us. Pray come in; do come in. You will find some friends here]
 [So began Miss Bates; and Mr. Knightley seemed determined to be heard inhis turn, for most resolutely and commandingly did he say,"How is your niece, Miss Bates?--I want to inquire after you all, butparticularly your niece. How is Miss Fairfax?--I hope she caught no coldlast night. How is she to-day? Tell me how Miss Fairfax is]
 [And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hearher in any thing else. The listeners were amused; and Mrs. Weston gaveEmma a look of particular meaning. But Emma still shook her head insteady scepticism]
 [So obliged to you!--so very much obliged to you for the carriage,"resumed Miss Bates.He cut her short with,"I am going to Kingston. Can I do any thing for you?""Oh! dear, Kingston--are you?--Mrs. Cole was saying the other day shewanted something from Kingston]
 ["Mrs. Cole has servants to send. Can I do any thing for _you_?""No, I thank you. But do come in. Who do you think is here?--MissWoodhouse and Miss Smith; so kind as to call to hear the new pianoforte.Do put up your horse at the Crown, and come in]
 ["Well," said he, in a deliberating manner, "for five minutes, perhaps]
 ["And here is Mrs. Weston and Mr. Frank Churchill too!--Quite delightful;so many friends!""No, not now, I thank you. I could not stay two minutes. I must get onto Kingston as fast as I can]
 ["Oh! do come in. They will be so very happy to see you]
 ["No, no; your room is full enough. I will call another day, and hear thepianoforte]
 ["Well, I am so sorry!--Oh! Mr. Knightley, what a delightful party lastnight; how extremely pleasant.--Did you ever see such dancing?--Was notit delightful?--Miss Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill; I never saw anything equal to it]
 ["Oh! very delightful indeed; I can say nothing less, for I suppose MissWoodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill are hearing every thing that passes.And (raising his voice still more) I do not see why Miss Fairfax shouldnot be mentioned too. I think Miss Fairfax dances very well; and Mrs.Weston is the very best country-dance player, without exception,in England. Now, if your friends have any gratitude, they will saysomething pretty loud about you and me in return; but I cannot stay tohear it]
 ["Oh! Mr. Knightley, one moment more; something of consequence--soshocked!--Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples!""What is the matter now?""To think of your sending us all your store apples. You said you hada great many, and now you have not one left. We really are so shocked!Mrs. Hodges may well be angry. William Larkins mentioned it here. Youshould not have done it, indeed you should not. Ah! he is off. He nevercan bear to be thanked. But I thought he would have staid now, and itwould have been a pity not to have mentioned.... Well, (returning to theroom,) I have not been able to succeed. Mr. Knightley cannot stop. He isgoing to Kingston. He asked me if he could do any thing...]
 ["Yes," said Jane, "we heard his kind offers, we heard every thing]
 ["Oh! yes, my dear, I dare say you might, because you know, the door wasopen, and the window was open, and Mr. Knightley spoke loud. You musthave heard every thing to be sure. 'Can I do any thing for you atKingston?' said he; so I just mentioned.... Oh! Miss Woodhouse, must yoube going?--You seem but just come--so very obliging of you]
 [Emma found it really time to be at home; the visit had already lastedlong; and on examining watches, so much of the morning was perceivedto be gone, that Mrs. Weston and her companion taking leave also, couldallow themselves only to walk with the two young ladies to Hartfieldgates, before they set off for Randalls.CHAPTER XIIt may be possible to do without dancing entirely. Instances have beenknown of young people passing many, many months successively, withoutbeing at any ball of any description, and no material injury accrueeither to body or mind;--but when a beginning is made--when thefelicities of rapid motion have once been, though slightly, felt--itmust be a very heavy set that does not ask for more.Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury, and longed to dance again;and the last half-hour of an evening which Mr. Woodhouse was persuadedto spend with his daughter at Randalls, was passed by the two youngpeople in schemes on the subject. Frank's was the first idea; and histhe greatest zeal in pursuing it; for the lady was the best judge of thedifficulties, and the most solicitous for accommodation and appearance.But still she had inclination enough for shewing people again howdelightfully Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse danced--fordoing that in which she need not blush to compare herself with JaneFairfax--and even for simple dancing itself, without any of the wickedaids of vanity--to assist him first in pacing out the room they were into see what it could be made to hold--and then in taking the dimensionsof the other parlour, in the hope of discovering, in spite of all thatMr. Weston could say of their exactly equal size, that it was a littlethe largest.His first proposition and request, that the dance begun at Mr. Cole'sshould be finished there--that the same party should be collected,and the same musician engaged, met with the readiest acquiescence. Mr.Weston entered into the idea with thorough enjoyment, and Mrs. Westonmost willingly undertook to play as long as they could wish to dance;and the interesting employment had followed, of reckoning up exactly whothere would be, and portioning out the indispensable division of spaceto every couple]
 [You and Miss Smith, and Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two MissCoxes five," had been repeated many times over. "And there will be thetwo Gilberts, young Cox, my father, and myself, besides Mr. Knightley.Yes, that will be quite enough for pleasure. You and Miss Smith, andMiss Fairfax, will be three, and the two Miss Coxes five; and for fivecouple there will be plenty of room]
 [But soon it came to be on one side,"But will there be good room for five couple?--I really do not thinkthere will]
 [On another,"And after all, five couple are not enough to make it worth while tostand up. Five couple are nothing, when one thinks seriously about it.It will not do to _invite_ five couple. It can be allowable only as thethought of the moment]
 [Somebody said that _Miss_ Gilbert was expected at her brother's, andmust be invited with the rest. Somebody else believed _Mrs_. Gilbertwould have danced the other evening, if she had been asked. A word wasput in for a second young Cox; and at last, Mr. Weston naming one familyof cousins who must be included, and another of very old acquaintancewho could not be left out, it became a certainty that the five couplewould be at least ten, and a very interesting speculation in whatpossible manner they could be disposed of.The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other. "Might notthey use both rooms, and dance across the passage?" It seemed thebest scheme; and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted abetter. Emma said it would be awkward; Mrs. Weston was in distress aboutthe supper; and Mr. Woodhouse opposed it earnestly, on the score ofhealth. It made him so very unhappy, indeed, that it could not bepersevered in]
 [Oh! no," said he; "it would be the extreme of imprudence. I could notbear it for Emma!--Emma is not strong. She would catch a dreadful cold.So would poor little Harriet. So you would all. Mrs. Weston, you wouldbe quite laid up; do not let them talk of such a wild thing. Pray donot let them talk of it. That young man (speaking lower) is verythoughtless. Do not tell his father, but that young man is not quitethe thing. He has been opening the doors very often this evening,and keeping them open very inconsiderately. He does not think of thedraught. I do not mean to set you against him, but indeed he is notquite the thing!"Mrs. Weston was sorry for such a charge. She knew the importance ofit, and said every thing in her power to do it away. Every door was nowclosed, the passage plan given up, and the first scheme of dancing onlyin the room they were in resorted to again; and with such good-will onFrank Churchill's part, that the space which a quarter of an hour beforehad been deemed barely sufficient for five couple, was now endeavouredto be made out quite enough for ten]
 [We were too magnificent," said he. "We allowed unnecessary room. Tencouple may stand here very well]
 [Emma demurred. "It would be a crowd--a sad crowd; and what could beworse than dancing without space to turn in?""Very true," he gravely replied; "it was very bad]
 [ But still he went onmeasuring, and still he ended with,"I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple]
 ["No, no," said she, "you are quite unreasonable. It would be dreadfulto be standing so close! Nothing can be farther from pleasure than to bedancing in a crowd--and a crowd in a little room!""There is no denying it," he replied. "I agree with you exactly. A crowdin a little room--Miss Woodhouse, you have the art of giving picturesin a few words. Exquisite, quite exquisite!--Still, however, havingproceeded so far, one is unwilling to give the matter up. It would bea disappointment to my father--and altogether--I do not know that--I amrather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very well]
 [Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a littleself-willed, and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure ofdancing with her; but she took the compliment, and forgave the rest.Had she intended ever to _marry_ him, it might have been worth while topause and consider, and try to understand the value of his preference,and the character of his temper; but for all the purposes of theiracquaintance, he was quite amiable enough.Before the middle of the next day, he was at Hartfield; and he enteredthe room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance ofthe scheme. It soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement]
 [Well, Miss Woodhouse," he almost immediately began, "your inclinationfor dancing has not been quite frightened away, I hope, by the terrorsof my father's little rooms. I bring a new proposal on the subject:--athought of my father's, which waits only your approbation to be actedupon. May I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dancesof this little projected ball, to be given, not at Randalls, but at theCrown Inn?""The Crown!""Yes; if you and Mr. Woodhouse see no objection, and I trust you cannot,my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there.Better accommodations, he can promise them, and not a less gratefulwelcome than at Randalls. It is his own idea. Mrs. Weston sees noobjection to it, provided you are satisfied. This is what we all feel.Oh! you were perfectly right! Ten couple, in either of the Randallsrooms, would have been insufferable!--Dreadful!--I felt how right youwere the whole time, but was too anxious for securing _any_ _thing_to like to yield. Is not it a good exchange?--You consent--I hope youconsent?""It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to, if Mr. and Mrs.Weston do not. I think it admirable; and, as far as I can answer formyself, shall be most happy--It seems the only improvement that couldbe. Papa, do you not think it an excellent improvement?"She was obliged to repeat and explain it, before it was fullycomprehended; and then, being quite new, farther representations werenecessary to make it acceptable]
 [No; he thought it very far from an improvement--a very bad plan--muchworse than the other. A room at an inn was always damp and dangerous;never properly aired, or fit to be inhabited. If they must dance, theyhad better dance at Randalls. He had never been in the room at the Crownin his life--did not know the people who kept it by sight.--Oh! no--avery bad plan. They would catch worse colds at the Crown than anywhere]
 ["I was going to observe, sir," said Frank Churchill, "that one of thegreat recommendations of this change would be the very little dangerof any body's catching cold--so much less danger at the Crown than atRandalls! Mr. Perry might have reason to regret the alteration, butnobody else could]
 ["Sir," said Mr. Woodhouse, rather warmly, "you are very much mistakenif you suppose Mr. Perry to be that sort of character. Mr. Perry isextremely concerned when any of us are ill. But I do not understand howthe room at the Crown can be safer for you than your father's house]
 ["From the very circumstance of its being larger, sir. We shall have nooccasion to open the windows at all--not once the whole evening; and itis that dreadful habit of opening the windows, letting in cold air uponheated bodies, which (as you well know, sir) does the mischief]
 ["Open the windows!--but surely, Mr. Churchill, nobody would think ofopening the windows at Randalls. Nobody could be so imprudent! I neverheard of such a thing. Dancing with open windows!--I am sure, neitheryour father nor Mrs. Weston (poor Miss Taylor that was) would sufferit]
 ["Ah! sir--but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind awindow-curtain, and throw up a sash, without its being suspected. I haveoften known it done myself]
 ["Have you indeed, sir?--Bless me! I never could have supposed it. But Ilive out of the world, and am often astonished at what I hear. However,this does make a difference; and, perhaps, when we come to talk itover--but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration. Onecannot resolve upon them in a hurry. If Mr. and Mrs. Weston will be soobliging as to call here one morning, we may talk it over, and see whatcan be done]
 ["But, unfortunately, sir, my time is so limited--""Oh!" interrupted Emma, "there will be plenty of time for talking everything over. There is no hurry at all. If it can be contrived to be atthe Crown, papa, it will be very convenient for the horses. They will beso near their own stable]
 ["So they will, my dear. That is a great thing. Not that James evercomplains; but it is right to spare our horses when we can. If I couldbe sure of the rooms being thoroughly aired--but is Mrs. Stokes to betrusted? I doubt it. I do not know her, even by sight]
 ["I can answer for every thing of that nature, sir, because it will beunder Mrs. Weston's care. Mrs. Weston undertakes to direct the whole]
 ["There, papa!--Now you must be satisfied--Our own dear Mrs. Weston, whois carefulness itself. Do not you remember what Mr. Perry said, so manyyears ago, when I had the measles? 'If _Miss_ _Taylor_ undertakes towrap Miss Emma up, you need not have any fears, sir]
 [ How often have Iheard you speak of it as such a compliment to her!""Aye, very true. Mr. Perry did say so. I shall never forget it. Poorlittle Emma! You were very bad with the measles; that is, you would havebeen very bad, but for Perry's great attention. He came four times a dayfor a week. He said, from the first, it was a very good sort--whichwas our great comfort; but the measles are a dreadful complaint. I hopewhenever poor Isabella's little ones have the measles, she will send forPerry]
 ["My father and Mrs. Weston are at the Crown at this moment," said FrankChurchill, "examining the capabilities of the house. I left them thereand came on to Hartfield, impatient for your opinion, and hoping youmight be persuaded to join them and give your advice on the spot. I wasdesired to say so from both. It would be the greatest pleasure tothem, if you could allow me to attend you there. They can do nothingsatisfactorily without you]
 [Emma was most happy to be called to such a council; and her father,engaging to think it all over while she was gone, the two young peopleset off together without delay for the Crown. There were Mr. and Mrs.Weston; delighted to see her and receive her approbation, very busy andvery happy in their different way; she, in some little distress; and he,finding every thing perfect]
 [Emma," said she, "this paper is worse than I expected. Look! in placesyou see it is dreadfully dirty; and the wainscot is more yellow andforlorn than any thing I could have imagined]
 ["My dear, you are too particular," said her husband. "What does all thatsignify? You will see nothing of it by candlelight. It will be asclean as Randalls by candlelight. We never see any thing of it on ourclub-nights]
 [The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant, "Men never knowwhen things are dirty or not;" and the gentlemen perhaps thought each tohimself, "Women will have their little nonsenses and needless cares]
 [One perplexity, however, arose, which the gentlemen did not disdain.It regarded a supper-room. At the time of the ballroom's being built,suppers had not been in question; and a small card-room adjoining, wasthe only addition. What was to be done? This card-room would be wantedas a card-room now; or, if cards were conveniently voted unnecessaryby their four selves, still was it not too small for any comfortablesupper? Another room of much better size might be secured for thepurpose; but it was at the other end of the house, and a long awkwardpassage must be gone through to get at it. This made a difficulty. Mrs.Weston was afraid of draughts for the young people in that passage;and neither Emma nor the gentlemen could tolerate the prospect of beingmiserably crowded at supper.Mrs. Weston proposed having no regular supper; merely sandwiches,&c., set out in the little room; but that was scouted as a wretchedsuggestion. A private dance, without sitting down to supper, waspronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women; andMrs. Weston must not speak of it again. She then took another line ofexpediency, and looking into the doubtful room, observed,"I do not think it _is_ so very small. We shall not be many, you know]
 [And Mr. Weston at the same time, walking briskly with long steps throughthe passage, was calling out,"You talk a great deal of the length of this passage, my dear. It is amere nothing after all; and not the least draught from the stairs]
 ["I wish," said Mrs. Weston, "one could know which arrangement our guestsin general would like best. To do what would be most generally pleasingmust be our object--if one could but tell what that would be]
 ["Yes, very true," cried Frank, "very true. You want your neighbours'opinions. I do not wonder at you. If one could ascertain what the chiefof them--the Coles, for instance. They are not far off. Shall I callupon them? Or Miss Bates? She is still nearer.--And I do not knowwhether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand the inclinations ofthe rest of the people as any body. I think we do want a larger council.Suppose I go and invite Miss Bates to join us?""Well--if you please," said Mrs. Weston rather hesitating, "if you thinkshe will be of any use]
 ["You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates," said Emma. "Shewill be all delight and gratitude, but she will tell you nothing. Shewill not even listen to your questions. I see no advantage in consultingMiss Bates]
 ["But she is so amusing, so extremely amusing! I am very fond of hearingMiss Bates talk. And I need not bring the whole family, you know]
 [Here Mr. Weston joined them, and on hearing what was proposed, gave ithis decided approbation]
 [Aye, do, Frank.--Go and fetch Miss Bates, and let us end the matter atonce. She will enjoy the scheme, I am sure; and I do not know a propererperson for shewing us how to do away difficulties. Fetch Miss Bates.We are growing a little too nice. She is a standing lesson of how to behappy. But fetch them both. Invite them both]
 ["Both sir! Can the old lady?"..]
 [The old lady! No, the young lady, to be sure. I shall think you a greatblockhead, Frank, if you bring the aunt without the niece]
 ["Oh! I beg your pardon, sir. I did not immediately recollect.Undoubtedly if you wish it, I will endeavour to persuade them both]
 [ Andaway he ran.Long before he reappeared, attending the short, neat, brisk-moving aunt,and her elegant niece,--Mrs. Weston, like a sweet-tempered woman anda good wife, had examined the passage again, and found the evils of itmuch less than she had supposed before--indeed very trifling; and hereended the difficulties of decision. All the rest, in speculation atleast, was perfectly smooth. All the minor arrangements of table andchair, lights and music, tea and supper, made themselves; or were leftas mere trifles to be settled at any time between Mrs. Weston and Mrs.Stokes.--Every body invited, was certainly to come; Frank had alreadywritten to Enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnight,which could not possibly be refused. And a delightful dance it was tobe.Most cordially, when Miss Bates arrived, did she agree that it must.As a counsellor she was not wanted; but as an approver, (a much safercharacter,) she was truly welcome. Her approbation, at once generaland minute, warm and incessant, could not but please; and for anotherhalf-hour they were all walking to and fro, between the different rooms,some suggesting, some attending, and all in happy enjoyment of thefuture. The party did not break up without Emma's being positivelysecured for the two first dances by the hero of the evening, nor withouther overhearing Mr. Weston whisper to his wife, "He has asked her, mydear. That's right. I knew he would!"CHAPTER XIIOne thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completelysatisfactory to Emma--its being fixed for a day within the grantedterm of Frank Churchill's stay in Surry; for, in spite of Mr. Weston'sconfidence, she could not think it so very impossible that theChurchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond hisfortnight. But this was not judged feasible. The preparations must taketheir time, nothing could be properly ready till the third week wereentered on, and for a few days they must be planning, proceeding andhoping in uncertainty--at the risk--in her opinion, the great risk, ofits being all in vain.Enscombe however was gracious, gracious in fact, if not in word. Hiswish of staying longer evidently did not please; but it was not opposed.All was safe and prosperous; and as the removal of one solicitudegenerally makes way for another, Emma, being now certain of herball, began to adopt as the next vexation Mr. Knightley's provokingindifference about it. Either because he did not dance himself, orbecause the plan had been formed without his being consulted, heseemed resolved that it should not interest him, determined against itsexciting any present curiosity, or affording him any future amusement.To her voluntary communications Emma could get no more approving reply,than,"Very well. If the Westons think it worth while to be at all thistrouble for a few hours of noisy entertainment, I have nothing to sayagainst it, but that they shall not chuse pleasures for me.--Oh! yes,I must be there; I could not refuse; and I will keep as much awake asI can; but I would rather be at home, looking over William Larkins'sweek's account; much rather, I confess.--Pleasure in seeingdancing!--not I, indeed--I never look at it--I do not know whodoes.--Fine dancing, I believe, like virtue, must be its own reward.Those who are standing by are usually thinking of something verydifferent]
 [This Emma felt was aimed at her; and it made her quite angry. It was notin compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was so indifferent, or soindignant; he was not guided by _her_ feelings in reprobating the ball,for _she_ enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree. It madeher animated--open hearted--she voluntarily said;--"Oh! Miss Woodhouse, I hope nothing may happen to prevent the ball.What a disappointment it would be! I do look forward to it, I own, with_very_ great pleasure]
 [It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have preferredthe society of William Larkins. No!--she was more and more convincedthat Mrs. Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise. There was a greatdeal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on his side--but nolove.Alas! there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with Mr. Knightley. Twodays of joyful security were immediately followed by the over-throw ofevery thing. A letter arrived from Mr. Churchill to urge his nephew'sinstant return. Mrs. Churchill was unwell--far too unwell to do withouthim; she had been in a very suffering state (so said her husband)when writing to her nephew two days before, though from her usualunwillingness to give pain, and constant habit of never thinking ofherself, she had not mentioned it; but now she was too ill to trifle,and must entreat him to set off for Enscombe without delay.The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma, in a note from Mrs.Weston, instantly. As to his going, it was inevitable. He must be gonewithin a few hours, though without feeling any real alarm for his aunt,to lessen his repugnance. He knew her illnesses; they never occurred butfor her own convenience.Mrs. Weston added, "that he could only allow himself time to hurry toHighbury, after breakfast, and take leave of the few friends therewhom he could suppose to feel any interest in him; and that he might beexpected at Hartfield very soon]
 [This wretched note was the finale of Emma's breakfast. When once it hadbeen read, there was no doing any thing, but lament and exclaim. Theloss of the ball--the loss of the young man--and all that the young manmight be feeling!--It was too wretched!--Such a delightful evening asit would have been!--Every body so happy! and she and her partner thehappiest!--"I said it would be so," was the only consolation.Her father's feelings were quite distinct. He thought principally ofMrs. Churchill's illness, and wanted to know how she was treated; and asfor the ball, it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed; but theywould all be safer at home.Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared; but if thisreflected at all upon his impatience, his sorrowful look and total wantof spirits when he did come might redeem him. He felt the going awayalmost too much to speak of it. His dejection was most evident. Hesat really lost in thought for the first few minutes; and when rousinghimself, it was only to say,"Of all horrid things, leave-taking is the worst]
 ["But you will come again," said Emma. "This will not be your only visitto Randalls]
 ["Ah!--(shaking his head)--the uncertainty of when I may be able toreturn!--I shall try for it with a zeal!--It will be the object ofall my thoughts and cares!--and if my uncle and aunt go to town thisspring--but I am afraid--they did not stir last spring--I am afraid itis a custom gone for ever]
 ["Our poor ball must be quite given up]
 ["Ah! that ball!--why did we wait for any thing?--why not seize thepleasure at once?--How often is happiness destroyed by preparation,foolish preparation!--You told us it would be so.--Oh! Miss Woodhouse,why are you always so right?""Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance. I would muchrather have been merry than wise]
 ["If I can come again, we are still to have our ball. My father dependson it. Do not forget your engagement]
 [Emma looked graciously]
 [Such a fortnight as it has been!" he continued; "every day moreprecious and more delightful than the day before!--every day makingme less fit to bear any other place. Happy those, who can remain atHighbury!""As you do us such ample justice now," said Emma, laughing, "I willventure to ask, whether you did not come a little doubtfully at first?Do not we rather surpass your expectations? I am sure we do. I am sureyou did not much expect to like us. You would not have been so long incoming, if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury]
 [He laughed rather consciously; and though denying the sentiment, Emmawas convinced that it had been so]
 [And you must be off this very morning?""Yes; my father is to join me here: we shall walk back together, and Imust be off immediately. I am almost afraid that every moment will bringhim]
 ["Not five minutes to spare even for your friends Miss Fairfax and MissBates? How unlucky! Miss Bates's powerful, argumentative mind might havestrengthened yours]
 ["Yes--I _have_ called there; passing the door, I thought it better. Itwas a right thing to do. I went in for three minutes, and was detainedby Miss Bates's being absent. She was out; and I felt it impossible notto wait till she came in. She is a woman that one may, that one _must_laugh at; but that one would not wish to slight. It was better to pay myvisit, then"--He hesitated, got up, walked to a window]
 [In short," said he, "perhaps, Miss Woodhouse--I think you can hardly bequite without suspicion"--He looked at her, as if wanting to read her thoughts. She hardly knewwhat to say. It seemed like the forerunner of something absolutelyserious, which she did not wish. Forcing herself to speak, therefore, inthe hope of putting it by, she calmly said,"You are quite in the right; it was most natural to pay your visit,then"--He was silent. She believed he was looking at her; probably reflectingon what she had said, and trying to understand the manner. She heardhim sigh. It was natural for him to feel that he had _cause_ to sigh.He could not believe her to be encouraging him. A few awkward momentspassed, and he sat down again; and in a more determined manner said,"It was something to feel that all the rest of my time might be given toHartfield. My regard for Hartfield is most warm"--He stopt again, rose again, and seemed quite embarrassed.--He was morein love with her than Emma had supposed; and who can say how it mighthave ended, if his father had not made his appearance? Mr. Woodhousesoon followed; and the necessity of exertion made him composed.A very few minutes more, however, completed the present trial. Mr.Weston, always alert when business was to be done, and as incapable ofprocrastinating any evil that was inevitable, as of foreseeing any thatwas doubtful, said, "It was time to go;" and the young man, though hemight and did sigh, could not but agree, to take leave]
 [I shall hear about you all," said he; "that is my chief consolation.I shall hear of every thing that is going on among you. I have engagedMrs. Weston to correspond with me. She has been so kind as to promiseit. Oh! the blessing of a female correspondent, when one is reallyinterested in the absent!--she will tell me every thing. In her lettersI shall be at dear Highbury again]
 [A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest "Good-bye," closed thespeech, and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill. Short had beenthe notice--short their meeting; he was gone; and Emma felt so sorryto part, and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from hisabsence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry, and feeling it toomuch.It was a sad change. They had been meeting almost every day since hisarrival. Certainly his being at Randalls had given great spirit tothe last two weeks--indescribable spirit; the idea, the expectationof seeing him which every morning had brought, the assurance of hisattentions, his liveliness, his manners! It had been a very happyfortnight, and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the commoncourse of Hartfield days. To complete every other recommendation, he had_almost_ told her that he loved her. What strength, or what constancy ofaffection he might be subject to, was another point; but at presentshe could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration, a consciouspreference of herself; and this persuasion, joined to all the rest,made her think that she _must_ be a little in love with him, in spite ofevery previous determination against it]
 [I certainly must," said she. "This sensation of listlessness,weariness, stupidity, this disinclination to sit down and employ myself,this feeling of every thing's being dull and insipid about the house!--I must be in love; I should be the oddest creature in the world if Iwere not--for a few weeks at least. Well! evil to some is always good toothers. I shall have many fellow-mourners for the ball, if not for FrankChurchill; but Mr. Knightley will be happy. He may spend the eveningwith his dear William Larkins now if he likes]
 [Mr. Knightley, however, shewed no triumphant happiness. He could not saythat he was sorry on his own account; his very cheerful look would havecontradicted him if he had; but he said, and very steadily, that hewas sorry for the disappointment of the others, and with considerablekindness added,"You, Emma, who have so few opportunities of dancing, you are really outof luck; you are very much out of luck!"It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax, to judge of her honestregret in this woeful change; but when they did meet, her composurewas odious. She had been particularly unwell, however, suffering fromheadache to a degree, which made her aunt declare, that had the balltaken place, she did not think Jane could have attended it; and it wascharity to impute some of her unbecoming indifference to the languor ofill-health.CHAPTER XIIIEmma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love. Her ideasonly varied as to the how much. At first, she thought it was a gooddeal; and afterwards, but little. She had great pleasure in hearingFrank Churchill talked of; and, for his sake, greater pleasure than everin seeing Mr. and Mrs. Weston; she was very often thinking of him, andquite impatient for a letter, that she might know how he was, how werehis spirits, how was his aunt, and what was the chance of his coming toRandalls again this spring. But, on the other hand, she could not admitherself to be unhappy, nor, after the first morning, to be less disposedfor employment than usual; she was still busy and cheerful; and,pleasing as he was, she could yet imagine him to have faults; andfarther, though thinking of him so much, and, as she sat drawing orworking, forming a thousand amusing schemes for the progress and closeof their attachment, fancying interesting dialogues, and inventingelegant letters; the conclusion of every imaginary declaration on hisside was that she _refused_ _him_. Their affection was always to subsideinto friendship. Every thing tender and charming was to mark theirparting; but still they were to part. When she became sensible of this,it struck her that she could not be very much in love; for in spite ofher previous and fixed determination never to quit her father, neverto marry, a strong attachment certainly must produce more of a strugglethan she could foresee in her own feelings]
 [I do not find myself making any use of the word _sacrifice_," saidshe.--"In not one of all my clever replies, my delicate negatives, isthere any allusion to making a sacrifice. I do suspect that he is notreally necessary to my happiness. So much the better. I certainly willnot persuade myself to feel more than I do. I am quite enough in love. Ishould be sorry to be more]
 [Upon the whole, she was equally contented with her view of his feelings]
 [_He_ is undoubtedly very much in love--every thing denotes it--verymuch in love indeed!--and when he comes again, if his affectioncontinue, I must be on my guard not to encourage it.--It would be mostinexcusable to do otherwise, as my own mind is quite made up. Not that Iimagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto. No, if hehad believed me at all to share his feelings, he would not have beenso wretched. Could he have thought himself encouraged, his looks andlanguage at parting would have been different.--Still, however, I mustbe on my guard. This is in the supposition of his attachment continuingwhat it now is; but I do not know that I expect it will; I do not lookupon him to be quite the sort of man--I do not altogether build uponhis steadiness or constancy.--His feelings are warm, but I can imaginethem rather changeable.--Every consideration of the subject, in short,makes me thankful that my happiness is not more deeply involved.--Ishall do very well again after a little while--and then, it will be agood thing over; for they say every body is in love once in their lives,and I shall have been let off easily]
 [When his letter to Mrs. Weston arrived, Emma had the perusal of it; andshe read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made herat first shake her head over her own sensations, and think she hadundervalued their strength. It was a long, well-written letter, givingthe particulars of his journey and of his feelings, expressing all theaffection, gratitude, and respect which was natural and honourable,and describing every thing exterior and local that could be supposedattractive, with spirit and precision. No suspicious flourishes now ofapology or concern; it was the language of real feeling towards Mrs.Weston; and the transition from Highbury to Enscombe, the contrastbetween the places in some of the first blessings of social life wasjust enough touched on to shew how keenly it was felt, and how much moremight have been said but for the restraints of propriety.--The charmof her own name was not wanting. _Miss_ _Woodhouse_ appeared more thanonce, and never without a something of pleasing connexion, either acompliment to her taste, or a remembrance of what she had said; and inthe very last time of its meeting her eye, unadorned as it was by anysuch broad wreath of gallantry, she yet could discern the effect ofher influence and acknowledge the greatest compliment perhaps of allconveyed. Compressed into the very lowest vacant corner were thesewords--"I had not a spare moment on Tuesday, as you know, for MissWoodhouse's beautiful little friend. Pray make my excuses and adieusto her]
 [ This, Emma could not doubt, was all for herself. Harriet wasremembered only from being _her_ friend. His information and prospectsas to Enscombe were neither worse nor better than had been anticipated;Mrs. Churchill was recovering, and he dared not yet, even in his ownimagination, fix a time for coming to Randalls again.Gratifying, however, and stimulative as was the letter in the materialpart, its sentiments, she yet found, when it was folded up and returnedto Mrs. Weston, that it had not added any lasting warmth, that she couldstill do without the writer, and that he must learn to do without her.Her intentions were unchanged. Her resolution of refusal only grew moreinteresting by the addition of a scheme for his subsequent consolationand happiness. His recollection of Harriet, and the words whichclothed it, the "beautiful little friend," suggested to her theidea of Harriet's succeeding her in his affections. Was itimpossible?--No.--Harriet undoubtedly was greatly his inferior inunderstanding; but he had been very much struck with the lovelinessof her face and the warm simplicity of her manner; and all theprobabilities of circumstance and connexion were in her favour.--ForHarriet, it would be advantageous and delightful indeed]
 [I must not dwell upon it," said she.--"I must not think of it. I knowthe danger of indulging such speculations. But stranger things havehappened; and when we cease to care for each other as we do now, itwill be the means of confirming us in that sort of true disinterestedfriendship which I can already look forward to with pleasure]
 [It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet's behalf, though itmight be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom; for evil in that quarterwas at hand. As Frank Churchill's arrival had succeeded Mr. Elton'sengagement in the conversation of Highbury, as the latest interesthad entirely borne down the first, so now upon Frank Churchill'sdisappearance, Mr. Elton's concerns were assuming the most irresistibleform.--His wedding-day was named. He would soon be among them again; Mr.Elton and his bride. There was hardly time to talk over the first letterfrom Enscombe before "Mr. Elton and his bride" was in every body'smouth, and Frank Churchill was forgotten. Emma grew sick at the sound.She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr. Elton; and Harriet'smind, she had been willing to hope, had been lately gaining strength.With Mr. Weston's ball in view at least, there had been a great deal ofinsensibility to other things; but it was now too evident that she hadnot attained such a state of composure as could stand against the actualapproach--new carriage, bell-ringing, and all.Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all thereasonings and soothings and attentions of every kind that Emma couldgive. Emma felt that she could not do too much for her, that Harriet hada right to all her ingenuity and all her patience; but it was heavy workto be for ever convincing without producing any effect, for ever agreedto, without being able to make their opinions the same. Harriet listenedsubmissively, and said "it was very true--it was just as Miss Woodhousedescribed--it was not worth while to think about them--and she would notthink about them any longer" but no change of subject could avail, andthe next half-hour saw her as anxious and restless about the Eltons asbefore. At last Emma attacked her on another ground]
 [Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr.Elton's marrying, Harriet, is the strongest reproach you can make _me_.You could not give me a greater reproof for the mistake I fell into.It was all my doing, I know. I have not forgotten it, I assureyou.--Deceived myself, I did very miserably deceive you--and it willbe a painful reflection to me for ever. Do not imagine me in danger offorgetting it]
 [Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words of eagerexclamation. Emma continued,"I have not said, exert yourself Harriet for my sake; think less, talkless of Mr. Elton for my sake; because for your own sake rather, Iwould wish it to be done, for the sake of what is more important than mycomfort, a habit of self-command in you, a consideration of what is yourduty, an attention to propriety, an endeavour to avoid the suspicions ofothers, to save your health and credit, and restore your tranquillity.These are the motives which I have been pressing on you. They are veryimportant--and sorry I am that you cannot feel them sufficiently to actupon them. My being saved from pain is a very secondary consideration.I want you to save yourself from greater pain. Perhaps I may sometimeshave felt that Harriet would not forget what was due--or rather whatwould be kind by me]
 [This appeal to her affections did more than all the rest. The idea ofwanting gratitude and consideration for Miss Woodhouse, whom she reallyloved extremely, made her wretched for a while, and when the violenceof grief was comforted away, still remained powerful enough to prompt towhat was right and support her in it very tolerably]
 [You, who have been the best friend I ever had in my life--Wantgratitude to you!--Nobody is equal to you!--I care for nobody as I dofor you!--Oh! Miss Woodhouse, how ungrateful I have been!"Such expressions, assisted as they were by every thing that look andmanner could do, made Emma feel that she had never loved Harriet sowell, nor valued her affection so highly before]
 [There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart," said she afterwards toherself. "There is nothing to be compared to it. Warmth and tendernessof heart, with an affectionate, open manner, will beat all theclearness of head in the world, for attraction, I am sure it will. Itis tenderness of heart which makes my dear father so generallybeloved--which gives Isabella all her popularity.--I have it not--butI know how to prize and respect it.--Harriet is my superior in all thecharm and all the felicity it gives. Dear Harriet!--I would not changeyou for the clearest-headed, longest-sighted, best-judging femalebreathing. Oh! the coldness of a Jane Fairfax!--Harriet is worth ahundred such--And for a wife--a sensible man's wife--it is invaluable. Imention no names; but happy the man who changes Emma for Harriet!"CHAPTER XIVMrs. Elton was first seen at church: but though devotion might beinterrupted, curiosity could not be satisfied by a bride in a pew, andit must be left for the visits in form which were then to be paid, tosettle whether she were very pretty indeed, or only rather pretty, ornot pretty at all.Emma had feelings, less of curiosity than of pride or propriety, to makeher resolve on not being the last to pay her respects; and she made apoint of Harriet's going with her, that the worst of the business mightbe gone through as soon as possible.She could not enter the house again, could not be in the same room towhich she had with such vain artifice retreated three months ago, tolace up her boot, without _recollecting_. A thousand vexatious thoughtswould recur. Compliments, charades, and horrible blunders; and it wasnot to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too; butshe behaved very well, and was only rather pale and silent. The visitwas of course short; and there was so much embarrassment and occupationof mind to shorten it, that Emma would not allow herself entirely toform an opinion of the lady, and on no account to give one, beyond thenothing-meaning terms of being "elegantly dressed, and very pleasing]
 [She did not really like her. She would not be in a hurry to find fault,but she suspected that there was no elegance;--ease, but not elegance.--She was almost sure that for a young woman, a stranger, a bride, therewas too much ease. Her person was rather good; her face not unpretty;but neither feature, nor air, nor voice, nor manner, were elegant. Emmathought at least it would turn out so.As for Mr. Elton, his manners did not appear--but no, she would notpermit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners. It was anawkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits, and a manhad need be all grace to acquit himself well through it. The womanwas better off; she might have the assistance of fine clothes, and theprivilege of bashfulness, but the man had only his own good sense todepend on; and when she considered how peculiarly unlucky poor Mr.Elton was in being in the same room at once with the woman he had justmarried, the woman he had wanted to marry, and the woman whom he hadbeen expected to marry, she must allow him to have the right to look aslittle wise, and to be as much affectedly, and as little really easy ascould be]
 [Well, Miss Woodhouse," said Harriet, when they had quitted thehouse, and after waiting in vain for her friend to begin; "Well, MissWoodhouse, (with a gentle sigh,) what do you think of her?--Is not shevery charming?"There was a little hesitation in Emma's answer]
 [Oh! yes--very--a very pleasing young woman]
 ["I think her beautiful, quite beautiful]
 ["Very nicely dressed, indeed; a remarkably elegant gown]
 ["I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love]
 ["Oh! no--there is nothing to surprize one at all.--A pretty fortune; andshe came in his way]
 ["I dare say," returned Harriet, sighing again, "I dare say she was verymuch attached to him]
 ["Perhaps she might; but it is not every man's fate to marry the womanwho loves him best. Miss Hawkins perhaps wanted a home, and thought thisthe best offer she was likely to have]
 ["Yes," said Harriet earnestly, "and well she might, nobody could everhave a better. Well, I wish them happy with all my heart. And now, MissWoodhouse, I do not think I shall mind seeing them again. He is just assuperior as ever;--but being married, you know, it is quite a differentthing. No, indeed, Miss Woodhouse, you need not be afraid; I can sit andadmire him now without any great misery. To know that he has not thrownhimself away, is such a comfort!--She does seem a charming young woman,just what he deserves. Happy creature! He called her 'Augusta]
 [ Howdelightful!"When the visit was returned, Emma made up her mind. She could then seemore and judge better. From Harriet's happening not to be at Hartfield,and her father's being present to engage Mr. Elton, she had a quarterof an hour of the lady's conversation to herself, and could composedlyattend to her; and the quarter of an hour quite convinced her thatMrs. Elton was a vain woman, extremely well satisfied with herself, andthinking much of her own importance; that she meant to shine and be verysuperior, but with manners which had been formed in a bad school, pertand familiar; that all her notions were drawn from one set of people,and one style of living; that if not foolish she was ignorant, and thather society would certainly do Mr. Elton no good.Harriet would have been a better match. If not wise or refined herself,she would have connected him with those who were; but Miss Hawkins, itmight be fairly supposed from her easy conceit, had been the best ofher own set. The rich brother-in-law near Bristol was the pride of thealliance, and his place and his carriages were the pride of him.The very first subject after being seated was Maple Grove, "My brotherMr. Suckling's seat;"--a comparison of Hartfield to Maple Grove. Thegrounds of Hartfield were small, but neat and pretty; and the house wasmodern and well-built. Mrs. Elton seemed most favourably impressedby the size of the room, the entrance, and all that she could see orimagine. "Very like Maple Grove indeed!--She was quite struck by thelikeness!--That room was the very shape and size of the morning-roomat Maple Grove; her sister's favourite room]
 [--Mr. Elton was appealedto.--"Was not it astonishingly like?--She could really almost fancyherself at Maple Grove]
 ["And the staircase--You know, as I came in, I observed how very like thestaircase was; placed exactly in the same part of the house. I reallycould not help exclaiming! I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, it is verydelightful to me, to be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial toas Maple Grove. I have spent so many happy months there! (with a littlesigh of sentiment). A charming place, undoubtedly. Every body whosees it is struck by its beauty; but to me, it has been quite a home.Whenever you are transplanted, like me, Miss Woodhouse, you willunderstand how very delightful it is to meet with any thing at all likewhat one has left behind. I always say this is quite one of the evils ofmatrimony]
 [Emma made as slight a reply as she could; but it was fully sufficientfor Mrs. Elton, who only wanted to be talking herself]
 [So extremely like Maple Grove! And it is not merely the house--thegrounds, I assure you, as far as I could observe, are strikingly like.The laurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here, and standvery much in the same way--just across the lawn; and I had a glimpseof a fine large tree, with a bench round it, which put me so exactly inmind! My brother and sister will be enchanted with this place. Peoplewho have extensive grounds themselves are always pleased with any thingin the same style]
 [Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment. She had a great idea thatpeople who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little for theextensive grounds of any body else; but it was not worth while to attackan error so double-dyed, and therefore only said in reply,"When you have seen more of this country, I am afraid you will think youhave overrated Hartfield. Surry is full of beauties]
 ["Oh! yes, I am quite aware of that. It is the garden of England, youknow. Surry is the garden of England]
 ["Yes; but we must not rest our claims on that distinction. Manycounties, I believe, are called the garden of England, as well asSurry]
 ["No, I fancy not," replied Mrs. Elton, with a most satisfied smile]
 [I never heard any county but Surry called so]
 [Emma was silenced]
 [My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring, or summerat farthest," continued Mrs. Elton; "and that will be our time forexploring. While they are with us, we shall explore a great deal, I daresay. They will have their barouche-landau, of course, which holds fourperfectly; and therefore, without saying any thing of _our_ carriage,we should be able to explore the different beauties extremely well. Theywould hardly come in their chaise, I think, at that season of theyear. Indeed, when the time draws on, I shall decidedly recommend theirbringing the barouche-landau; it will be so very much preferable.When people come into a beautiful country of this sort, you know, MissWoodhouse, one naturally wishes them to see as much as possible; and Mr.Suckling is extremely fond of exploring. We explored to King's-Westontwice last summer, in that way, most delightfully, just after theirfirst having the barouche-landau. You have many parties of that kindhere, I suppose, Miss Woodhouse, every summer?""No; not immediately here. We are rather out of distance of the verystriking beauties which attract the sort of parties you speak of; and weare a very quiet set of people, I believe; more disposed to stay at homethan engage in schemes of pleasure]
 ["Ah! there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort. Nobody canbe more devoted to home than I am. I was quite a proverb for it at MapleGrove. Many a time has Selina said, when she has been going to Bristol,'I really cannot get this girl to move from the house. I absolutely mustgo in by myself, though I hate being stuck up in the barouche-landauwithout a companion; but Augusta, I believe, with her own good-will,would never stir beyond the park paling]
 [ Many a time has she said so;and yet I am no advocate for entire seclusion. I think, on the contrary,when people shut themselves up entirely from society, it is a verybad thing; and that it is much more advisable to mix in the world ina proper degree, without living in it either too much or too little. Iperfectly understand your situation, however, Miss Woodhouse--(lookingtowards Mr. Woodhouse), Your father's state of health must be a greatdrawback. Why does not he try Bath?--Indeed he should. Let me recommendBath to you. I assure you I have no doubt of its doing Mr. Woodhousegood]
 ["My father tried it more than once, formerly; but without receiving anybenefit; and Mr. Perry, whose name, I dare say, is not unknown to you,does not conceive it would be at all more likely to be useful now]
 ["Ah! that's a great pity; for I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, where thewaters do agree, it is quite wonderful the relief they give. In my Bathlife, I have seen such instances of it! And it is so cheerful a place,that it could not fail of being of use to Mr. Woodhouse's spirits,which, I understand, are sometimes much depressed. And as to itsrecommendations to _you_, I fancy I need not take much pains to dwellon them. The advantages of Bath to the young are pretty generallyunderstood. It would be a charming introduction for you, who have livedso secluded a life; and I could immediately secure you some of the bestsociety in the place. A line from me would bring you a little host ofacquaintance; and my particular friend, Mrs. Partridge, the lady I havealways resided with when in Bath, would be most happy to shew you anyattentions, and would be the very person for you to go into publicwith]
 [It was as much as Emma could bear, without being impolite. The ideaof her being indebted to Mrs. Elton for what was called an_introduction_--of her going into public under the auspices of a friendof Mrs. Elton's--probably some vulgar, dashing widow, who, with thehelp of a boarder, just made a shift to live!--The dignity of MissWoodhouse, of Hartfield, was sunk indeed!She restrained herself, however, from any of the reproofs she could havegiven, and only thanked Mrs. Elton coolly; "but their going to Bath wasquite out of the question; and she was not perfectly convinced thatthe place might suit her better than her father]
 [ And then, to preventfarther outrage and indignation, changed the subject directly]
 [I do not ask whether you are musical, Mrs. Elton. Upon these occasions,a lady's character generally precedes her; and Highbury has long knownthat you are a superior performer]
 ["Oh! no, indeed; I must protest against any such idea. A superiorperformer!--very far from it, I assure you. Consider from how partiala quarter your information came. I am doatingly fond ofmusic--passionately fond;--and my friends say I am not entirely devoidof taste; but as to any thing else, upon my honour my performance is_mediocre_ to the last degree. You, Miss Woodhouse, I well know, playdelightfully. I assure you it has been the greatest satisfaction,comfort, and delight to me, to hear what a musical society I am gotinto. I absolutely cannot do without music. It is a necessary of life tome; and having always been used to a very musical society, both atMaple Grove and in Bath, it would have been a most serious sacrifice. Ihonestly said as much to Mr. E. when he was speaking of my futurehome, and expressing his fears lest the retirement of it should bedisagreeable; and the inferiority of the house too--knowing what I hadbeen accustomed to--of course he was not wholly without apprehension.When he was speaking of it in that way, I honestly said that _the__world_ I could give up--parties, balls, plays--for I had no fear ofretirement. Blessed with so many resources within myself, the world wasnot necessary to _me_. I could do very well without it. To those who hadno resources it was a different thing; but my resources made me quiteindependent. And as to smaller-sized rooms than I had been used to, Ireally could not give it a thought. I hoped I was perfectly equal to anysacrifice of that description. Certainly I had been accustomed to everyluxury at Maple Grove; but I did assure him that two carriages were notnecessary to my happiness, nor were spacious apartments. 'But,' said I,'to be quite honest, I do not think I can live without something of amusical society. I condition for nothing else; but without music, lifewould be a blank to me]
 [""We cannot suppose," said Emma, smiling, "that Mr. Elton would hesitateto assure you of there being a _very_ musical society in Highbury; andI hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more than may bepardoned, in consideration of the motive]
 ["No, indeed, I have no doubts at all on that head. I am delighted tofind myself in such a circle. I hope we shall have many sweet littleconcerts together. I think, Miss Woodhouse, you and I must establish amusical club, and have regular weekly meetings at your house, or ours.Will not it be a good plan? If _we_ exert ourselves, I think we shallnot be long in want of allies. Something of that nature would beparticularly desirable for _me_, as an inducement to keep me inpractice; for married women, you know--there is a sad story againstthem, in general. They are but too apt to give up music]
 ["But you, who are so extremely fond of it--there can be no danger,surely?""I should hope not; but really when I look around among my acquaintance,I tremble. Selina has entirely given up music--never touches theinstrument--though she played sweetly. And the same may be said of Mrs.Jeffereys--Clara Partridge, that was--and of the two Milmans, now Mrs.Bird and Mrs. James Cooper; and of more than I can enumerate. Upon myword it is enough to put one in a fright. I used to be quite angry withSelina; but really I begin now to comprehend that a married woman hasmany things to call her attention. I believe I was half an hour thismorning shut up with my housekeeper]
 ["But every thing of that kind," said Emma, "will soon be in so regular atrain--""Well," said Mrs. Elton, laughing, "we shall see]
 [Emma, finding her so determined upon neglecting her music, had nothingmore to say; and, after a moment's pause, Mrs. Elton chose anothersubject]
 [We have been calling at Randalls," said she, "and found them both athome; and very pleasant people they seem to be. I like them extremely.Mr. Weston seems an excellent creature--quite a first-rate favouritewith me already, I assure you. And _she_ appears so truly good--there issomething so motherly and kind-hearted about her, that it wins upon onedirectly. She was your governess, I think?"Emma was almost too much astonished to answer; but Mrs. Elton hardlywaited for the affirmative before she went on]
 [Having understood as much, I was rather astonished to find her so verylady-like! But she is really quite the gentlewoman]
 ["Mrs. Weston's manners," said Emma, "were always particularly good.Their propriety, simplicity, and elegance, would make them the safestmodel for any young woman]
 ["And who do you think came in while we were there?"Emma was quite at a loss. The tone implied some old acquaintance--andhow could she possibly guess?"Knightley!" continued Mrs. Elton; "Knightley himself!--Was not itlucky?--for, not being within when he called the other day, I had neverseen him before; and of course, as so particular a friend of Mr. E]
 [s,I had a great curiosity. 'My friend Knightley' had been so oftenmentioned, that I was really impatient to see him; and I must do mycaro sposo the justice to say that he need not be ashamed of his friend.Knightley is quite the gentleman. I like him very much. Decidedly, Ithink, a very gentleman-like man]
 [Happily, it was now time to be gone. They were off; and Emma couldbreathe]
 [Insufferable woman!" was her immediate exclamation. "Worse than I hadsupposed. Absolutely insufferable! Knightley!--I could not havebelieved it. Knightley!--never seen him in her life before, and callhim Knightley!--and discover that he is a gentleman! A little upstart,vulgar being, with her Mr. E., and her _caro_ _sposo_, and herresources, and all her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery.Actually to discover that Mr. Knightley is a gentleman! I doubt whetherhe will return the compliment, and discover her to be a lady. I couldnot have believed it! And to propose that she and I should unite toform a musical club! One would fancy we were bosom friends! And Mrs.Weston!--Astonished that the person who had brought me up should be agentlewoman! Worse and worse. I never met with her equal. Much beyondmy hopes. Harriet is disgraced by any comparison. Oh! what would FrankChurchill say to her, if he were here? How angry and how diverted hewould be! Ah! there I am--thinking of him directly. Always the firstperson to be thought of! How I catch myself out! Frank Churchill comesas regularly into my mind!"--All this ran so glibly through her thoughts, that by the time her fatherhad arranged himself, after the bustle of the Eltons' departure, and wasready to speak, she was very tolerably capable of attending]
 [Well, my dear," he deliberately began, "considering we never saw herbefore, she seems a very pretty sort of young lady; and I dare say shewas very much pleased with you. She speaks a little too quick. A littlequickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear. But I believeI am nice; I do not like strange voices; and nobody speaks like you andpoor Miss Taylor. However, she seems a very obliging, pretty-behavedyoung lady, and no doubt will make him a very good wife. Though I thinkhe had better not have married. I made the best excuses I could for nothaving been able to wait on him and Mrs. Elton on this happy occasion; Isaid that I hoped I _should_ in the course of the summer. But I ought tohave gone before. Not to wait upon a bride is very remiss. Ah! it shewswhat a sad invalid I am! But I do not like the corner into VicarageLane]
 ["I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir. Mr. Elton knows you]
 ["Yes: but a young lady--a bride--I ought to have paid my respects to herif possible. It was being very deficient]
 ["But, my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony; and therefore whyshould you be so anxious to pay your respects to a _bride_? It ought tobe no recommendation to _you_. It is encouraging people to marry if youmake so much of them]
 ["No, my dear, I never encouraged any body to marry, but I would alwayswish to pay every proper attention to a lady--and a bride, especially,is never to be neglected. More is avowedly due to _her_. A bride, youknow, my dear, is always the first in company, let the others be whothey may]
 ["Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to marry, I do not know whatis. And I should never have expected you to be lending your sanction tosuch vanity-baits for poor young ladies]
 ["My dear, you do not understand me. This is a matter of merecommon politeness and good-breeding, and has nothing to do with anyencouragement to people to marry]
 [Emma had done. Her father was growing nervous, and could not understand_her_. Her mind returned to Mrs. Elton's offences, and long, very long,did they occupy her.CHAPTER XVEmma was not required, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her illopinion of Mrs. Elton. Her observation had been pretty correct. Such asMrs. Elton appeared to her on this second interview, such she appearedwhenever they met again,--self-important, presuming, familiar, ignorant,and ill-bred. She had a little beauty and a little accomplishment,but so little judgment that she thought herself coming with superiorknowledge of the world, to enliven and improve a country neighbourhood;and conceived Miss Hawkins to have held such a place in society as Mrs.Elton's consequence only could surpass.There was no reason to suppose Mr. Elton thought at all differently fromhis wife. He seemed not merely happy with her, but proud. He had the airof congratulating himself on having brought such a woman to Highbury,as not even Miss Woodhouse could equal; and the greater part of hernew acquaintance, disposed to commend, or not in the habit of judging,following the lead of Miss Bates's good-will, or taking it for grantedthat the bride must be as clever and as agreeable as she professedherself, were very well satisfied; so that Mrs. Elton's praisepassed from one mouth to another as it ought to do, unimpeded by MissWoodhouse, who readily continued her first contribution and talked witha good grace of her being "very pleasant and very elegantly dressed]
 [In one respect Mrs. Elton grew even worse than she had appeared atfirst. Her feelings altered towards Emma.--Offended, probably, by thelittle encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with, she drewback in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant; andthough the effect was agreeable, the ill-will which produced it wasnecessarily increasing Emma's dislike. Her manners, too--and Mr.Elton's, were unpleasant towards Harriet. They were sneering andnegligent. Emma hoped it must rapidly work Harriet's cure; but thesensations which could prompt such behaviour sunk them both verymuch.--It was not to be doubted that poor Harriet's attachment had beenan offering to conjugal unreserve, and her own share in the story, undera colouring the least favourable to her and the most soothing to him,had in all likelihood been given also. She was, of course, the objectof their joint dislike.--When they had nothing else to say, it must bealways easy to begin abusing Miss Woodhouse; and the enmity whichthey dared not shew in open disrespect to her, found a broader vent incontemptuous treatment of Harriet.Mrs. Elton took a great fancy to Jane Fairfax; and from the first. Notmerely when a state of warfare with one young lady might be supposed torecommend the other, but from the very first; and she was not satisfiedwith expressing a natural and reasonable admiration--but withoutsolicitation, or plea, or privilege, she must be wanting to assist andbefriend her.--Before Emma had forfeited her confidence, and about thethird time of their meeting, she heard all Mrs. Elton's knight-errantryon the subject.--"Jane Fairfax is absolutely charming, Miss Woodhouse.--I quite raveabout Jane Fairfax.--A sweet, interesting creature. So mild andladylike--and with such talents!--I assure you I think she has veryextraordinary talents. I do not scruple to say that she plays extremelywell. I know enough of music to speak decidedly on that point. Oh! sheis absolutely charming! You will laugh at my warmth--but, upon my word,I talk of nothing but Jane Fairfax.--And her situation is so calculatedto affect one!--Miss Woodhouse, we must exert ourselves and endeavourto do something for her. We must bring her forward. Such talent as hersmust not be suffered to remain unknown.--I dare say you have heard thosecharming lines of the poet,        'Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,          'And waste its fragrance on the desert air]
 [We must not allow them to be verified in sweet Jane Fairfax]
 ["I cannot think there is any danger of it," was Emma's calm answer--"andwhen you are better acquainted with Miss Fairfax's situation andunderstand what her home has been, with Colonel and Mrs. Campbell, Ihave no idea that you will suppose her talents can be unknown]
 ["Oh! but dear Miss Woodhouse, she is now in such retirement, suchobscurity, so thrown away.--Whatever advantages she may have enjoyedwith the Campbells are so palpably at an end! And I think she feels it.I am sure she does. She is very timid and silent. One can see that shefeels the want of encouragement. I like her the better for it. Imust confess it is a recommendation to me. I am a great advocate fortimidity--and I am sure one does not often meet with it.--But in thosewho are at all inferior, it is extremely prepossessing. Oh! I assureyou, Jane Fairfax is a very delightful character, and interests me morethan I can express]
 ["You appear to feel a great deal--but I am not aware how you or any ofMiss Fairfax's acquaintance here, any of those who have known her longerthan yourself, can shew her any other attention than"--"My dear Miss Woodhouse, a vast deal may be done by those who dare toact. You and I need not be afraid. If _we_ set the example, many willfollow it as far as they can; though all have not our situations. _We_have carriages to fetch and convey her home, and _we_ live in a stylewhich could not make the addition of Jane Fairfax, at any time, theleast inconvenient.--I should be extremely displeased if Wright were tosend us up such a dinner, as could make me regret having asked _more_than Jane Fairfax to partake of it. I have no idea of that sort ofthing. It is not likely that I _should_, considering what I have beenused to. My greatest danger, perhaps, in housekeeping, may be quite theother way, in doing too much, and being too careless of expense. MapleGrove will probably be my model more than it ought to be--for we do notat all affect to equal my brother, Mr. Suckling, in income.--However, myresolution is taken as to noticing Jane Fairfax.--I shall certainly haveher very often at my house, shall introduce her wherever I can, shallhave musical parties to draw out her talents, and shall be constantlyon the watch for an eligible situation. My acquaintance is so veryextensive, that I have little doubt of hearing of something to suither shortly.--I shall introduce her, of course, very particularly to mybrother and sister when they come to us. I am sure they will like herextremely; and when she gets a little acquainted with them, her fearswill completely wear off, for there really is nothing in the mannersof either but what is highly conciliating.--I shall have her very oftenindeed while they are with me, and I dare say we shall sometimes find aseat for her in the barouche-landau in some of our exploring parties]
 ["Poor Jane Fairfax!"--thought Emma.--"You have not deserved this. Youmay have done wrong with regard to Mr. Dixon, but this is a punishmentbeyond what you can have merited!--The kindness and protection of Mrs.Elton!--'Jane Fairfax and Jane Fairfax]
 [ Heavens! Let me not supposethat she dares go about, Emma Woodhouse-ing me!--But upon my honour,there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman's tongue!"Emma had not to listen to such paradings again--to any so exclusivelyaddressed to herself--so disgustingly decorated with a "dear MissWoodhouse]
 [ The change on Mrs. Elton's side soon afterwards appeared,and she was left in peace--neither forced to be the very particularfriend of Mrs. Elton, nor, under Mrs. Elton's guidance, the very activepatroness of Jane Fairfax, and only sharing with others in a generalway, in knowing what was felt, what was meditated, what was done.She looked on with some amusement.--Miss Bates's gratitude forMrs. Elton's attentions to Jane was in the first style of guilelesssimplicity and warmth. She was quite one of her worthies--themost amiable, affable, delightful woman--just as accomplished andcondescending as Mrs. Elton meant to be considered. Emma's only surprizewas that Jane Fairfax should accept those attentions and tolerate Mrs.Elton as she seemed to do. She heard of her walking with the Eltons,sitting with the Eltons, spending a day with the Eltons! This wasastonishing!--She could not have believed it possible that the taste orthe pride of Miss Fairfax could endure such society and friendship asthe Vicarage had to offer]
 [She is a riddle, quite a riddle!" said she.--"To chuse to remain heremonth after month, under privations of every sort! And now to chuse themortification of Mrs. Elton's notice and the penury of her conversation,rather than return to the superior companions who have always loved herwith such real, generous affection]
 [Jane had come to Highbury professedly for three months; the Campbellswere gone to Ireland for three months; but now the Campbells hadpromised their daughter to stay at least till Midsummer, and freshinvitations had arrived for her to join them there. According to MissBates--it all came from her--Mrs. Dixon had written most pressingly.Would Jane but go, means were to be found, servants sent, friendscontrived--no travelling difficulty allowed to exist; but still she haddeclined it!"She must have some motive, more powerful than appears, for refusingthis invitation," was Emma's conclusion. "She must be under some sortof penance, inflicted either by the Campbells or herself. There is greatfear, great caution, great resolution somewhere.--She is _not_ to bewith the _Dixons_. The decree is issued by somebody. But why must sheconsent to be with the Eltons?--Here is quite a separate puzzle]
 [Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of the subject, beforethe few who knew her opinion of Mrs. Elton, Mrs. Weston ventured thisapology for Jane]
 [We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage,my dear Emma--but it is better than being always at home. Her aunt is agood creature, but, as a constant companion, must be very tiresome. Wemust consider what Miss Fairfax quits, before we condemn her taste forwhat she goes to]
 ["You are right, Mrs. Weston," said Mr. Knightley warmly, "Miss Fairfaxis as capable as any of us of forming a just opinion of Mrs. Elton.Could she have chosen with whom to associate, she would not have chosenher. But (with a reproachful smile at Emma) she receives attentions fromMrs. Elton, which nobody else pays her]
 [Emma felt that Mrs. Weston was giving her a momentary glance; and shewas herself struck by his warmth. With a faint blush, she presentlyreplied,"Such attentions as Mrs. Elton's, I should have imagined, would ratherdisgust than gratify Miss Fairfax. Mrs. Elton's invitations I shouldhave imagined any thing but inviting]
 ["I should not wonder," said Mrs. Weston, "if Miss Fairfax were to havebeen drawn on beyond her own inclination, by her aunt's eagerness inaccepting Mrs. Elton's civilities for her. Poor Miss Bates mayvery likely have committed her niece and hurried her into a greaterappearance of intimacy than her own good sense would have dictated, inspite of the very natural wish of a little change]
 [Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again; and after a fewminutes silence, he said,"Another thing must be taken into consideration too--Mrs. Elton doesnot talk _to_ Miss Fairfax as she speaks _of_ her. We all know thedifference between the pronouns he or she and thou, the plainest spokenamongst us; we all feel the influence of a something beyond commoncivility in our personal intercourse with each other--a something moreearly implanted. We cannot give any body the disagreeable hints that wemay have been very full of the hour before. We feel things differently.And besides the operation of this, as a general principle, you may besure that Miss Fairfax awes Mrs. Elton by her superiority both of mindand manner; and that, face to face, Mrs. Elton treats her with all therespect which she has a claim to. Such a woman as Jane Fairfax probablynever fell in Mrs. Elton's way before--and no degree of vanity canprevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action, ifnot in consciousness]
 ["I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax," said Emma. Little Henrywas in her thoughts, and a mixture of alarm and delicacy made herirresolute what else to say]
 [Yes," he replied, "any body may know how highly I think of her]
 ["And yet," said Emma, beginning hastily and with an arch look, but soonstopping--it was better, however, to know the worst at once--she hurriedon--"And yet, perhaps, you may hardly be aware yourself how highly itis. The extent of your admiration may take you by surprize some day orother]
 [Mr. Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thickleather gaiters, and either the exertion of getting them together, orsome other cause, brought the colour into his face, as he answered,"Oh! are you there?--But you are miserably behindhand. Mr. Cole gave mea hint of it six weeks ago]
 [He stopped.--Emma felt her foot pressed by Mrs. Weston, and did notherself know what to think. In a moment he went on--"That will never be, however, I can assure you. Miss Fairfax, I daresay, would not have me if I were to ask her--and I am very sure I shallnever ask her]
 [Emma returned her friend's pressure with interest; and was pleasedenough to exclaim,"You are not vain, Mr. Knightley. I will say that for you]
 [He seemed hardly to hear her; he was thoughtful--and in a manner whichshewed him not pleased, soon afterwards said,"So you have been settling that I should marry Jane Fairfax?""No indeed I have not. You have scolded me too much for match-making,for me to presume to take such a liberty with you. What I said just now,meant nothing. One says those sort of things, of course, without anyidea of a serious meaning. Oh! no, upon my word I have not the smallestwish for your marrying Jane Fairfax or Jane any body. You would not comein and sit with us in this comfortable way, if you were married]
 [Mr. Knightley was thoughtful again. The result of his reverie was, "No,Emma, I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever takeme by surprize.--I never had a thought of her in that way, I assureyou]
 [ And soon afterwards, "Jane Fairfax is a very charming youngwoman--but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect. She has a fault. She hasnot the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife]
 [Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault. "Well," saidshe, "and you soon silenced Mr. Cole, I suppose?""Yes, very soon. He gave me a quiet hint; I told him he was mistaken;he asked my pardon and said no more. Cole does not want to be wiser orwittier than his neighbours]
 ["In that respect how unlike dear Mrs. Elton, who wants to be wiser andwittier than all the world! I wonder how she speaks of the Coles--whatshe calls them! How can she find any appellation for them, deep enoughin familiar vulgarity? She calls you, Knightley--what can she do forMr. Cole? And so I am not to be surprized that Jane Fairfax acceptsher civilities and consents to be with her. Mrs. Weston, your argumentweighs most with me. I can much more readily enter into the temptationof getting away from Miss Bates, than I can believe in the triumph ofMiss Fairfax's mind over Mrs. Elton. I have no faith in Mrs. Elton'sacknowledging herself the inferior in thought, word, or deed; or in herbeing under any restraint beyond her own scanty rule of good-breeding.I cannot imagine that she will not be continually insulting her visitorwith praise, encouragement, and offers of service; that she will not becontinually detailing her magnificent intentions, from the procuring hera permanent situation to the including her in those delightful exploringparties which are to take place in the barouche-landau]
 ["Jane Fairfax has feeling," said Mr. Knightley--"I do not accuse herof want of feeling. Her sensibilities, I suspect, are strong--and hertemper excellent in its power of forbearance, patience, self-control;but it wants openness. She is reserved, more reserved, I think, thanshe used to be--And I love an open temper. No--till Cole alluded to mysupposed attachment, it had never entered my head. I saw Jane Fairfaxand conversed with her, with admiration and pleasure always--but with nothought beyond]
 ["Well, Mrs. Weston," said Emma triumphantly when he left them, "what doyou say now to Mr. Knightley's marrying Jane Fairfax?""Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very much occupied by theidea of _not_ being in love with her, that I should not wonder if itwere to end in his being so at last. Do not beat me]
 [CHAPTER XVIEvery body in and about Highbury who had ever visited Mr. Elton, wasdisposed to pay him attention on his marriage. Dinner-parties andevening-parties were made for him and his lady; and invitations flowedin so fast that she had soon the pleasure of apprehending they werenever to have a disengaged day]
 [I see how it is," said she. "I see what a life I am to lead among you.Upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipated. We really seem quitethe fashion. If this is living in the country, it is nothing veryformidable. From Monday next to Saturday, I assure you we have not adisengaged day!--A woman with fewer resources than I have, need not havebeen at a loss]
 [No invitation came amiss to her. Her Bath habits made evening-partiesperfectly natural to her, and Maple Grove had given her a taste fordinners. She was a little shocked at the want of two drawing rooms, atthe poor attempt at rout-cakes, and there being no ice in the Highburycard-parties. Mrs. Bates, Mrs. Perry, Mrs. Goddard and others, were agood deal behind-hand in knowledge of the world, but she would soon shewthem how every thing ought to be arranged. In the course of the springshe must return their civilities by one very superior party--in whichher card-tables should be set out with their separate candles andunbroken packs in the true style--and more waiters engaged for theevening than their own establishment could furnish, to carry round therefreshments at exactly the proper hour, and in the proper order.Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisfied without a dinner atHartfield for the Eltons. They must not do less than others, or sheshould be exposed to odious suspicions, and imagined capable of pitifulresentment. A dinner there must be. After Emma had talked about it forten minutes, Mr. Woodhouse felt no unwillingness, and only made theusual stipulation of not sitting at the bottom of the table himself,with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should do it for him.The persons to be invited, required little thought. Besides theEltons, it must be the Westons and Mr. Knightley; so far it was all ofcourse--and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet mustbe asked to make the eighth:--but this invitation was not given withequal satisfaction, and on many accounts Emma was particularly pleasedby Harriet's begging to be allowed to decline it. "She would rather notbe in his company more than she could help. She was not yet quiteable to see him and his charming happy wife together, without feelinguncomfortable. If Miss Woodhouse would not be displeased, she wouldrather stay at home]
 [ It was precisely what Emma would have wished, hadshe deemed it possible enough for wishing. She was delighted with thefortitude of her little friend--for fortitude she knew it was in her togive up being in company and stay at home; and she could now invite thevery person whom she really wanted to make the eighth, Jane Fairfax.--Since her last conversation with Mrs. Weston and Mr. Knightley, shewas more conscience-stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had oftenbeen.--Mr. Knightley's words dwelt with her. He had said that JaneFairfax received attentions from Mrs. Elton which nobody else paid her]
 [This is very true," said she, "at least as far as relates to me, whichwas all that was meant--and it is very shameful.--Of the same age--andalways knowing her--I ought to have been more her friend.--She willnever like me now. I have neglected her too long. But I will shew hergreater attention than I have done]
 [Every invitation was successful. They were all disengaged and allhappy.--The preparatory interest of this dinner, however, was not yetover. A circumstance rather unlucky occurred. The two eldest littleKnightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of someweeks in the spring, and their papa now proposed bringing them, andstaying one whole day at Hartfield--which one day would be the very dayof this party.--His professional engagements did not allow of his beingput off, but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happeningso. Mr. Woodhouse considered eight persons at dinner together as theutmost that his nerves could bear--and here would be a ninth--and Emmaapprehended that it would be a ninth very much out of humour at notbeing able to come even to Hartfield for forty-eight hours withoutfalling in with a dinner-party.She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself, byrepresenting that though he certainly would make them nine, yethe always said so little, that the increase of noise would be veryimmaterial. She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself, tohave him with his grave looks and reluctant conversation opposed to herinstead of his brother.The event was more favourable to Mr. Woodhouse than to Emma. JohnKnightley came; but Mr. Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town andmust be absent on the very day. He might be able to join them in theevening, but certainly not to dinner. Mr. Woodhouse was quite at ease;and the seeing him so, with the arrival of the little boys and thephilosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate, removed thechief of even Emma's vexation.The day came, the party were punctually assembled, and Mr. JohnKnightley seemed early to devote himself to the business of beingagreeable. Instead of drawing his brother off to a window while theywaited for dinner, he was talking to Miss Fairfax. Mrs. Elton,as elegant as lace and pearls could make her, he looked at insilence--wanting only to observe enough for Isabella's information--butMiss Fairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could talkto her. He had met her before breakfast as he was returning from a walkwith his little boys, when it had been just beginning to rain. It wasnatural to have some civil hopes on the subject, and he said,"I hope you did not venture far, Miss Fairfax, this morning, or I amsure you must have been wet.--We scarcely got home in time. I hope youturned directly]
 ["I went only to the post-office," said she, "and reached home before therain was much. It is my daily errand. I always fetch the letters whenI am here. It saves trouble, and is a something to get me out. A walkbefore breakfast does me good]
 ["Not a walk in the rain, I should imagine]
 ["No, but it did not absolutely rain when I set out]
 [Mr. John Knightley smiled, and replied,"That is to say, you chose to have your walk, for you were not six yardsfrom your own door when I had the pleasure of meeting you; and Henryand John had seen more drops than they could count long before. Thepost-office has a great charm at one period of our lives. When you havelived to my age, you will begin to think letters are never worth goingthrough the rain for]
 [There was a little blush, and then this answer,"I must not hope to be ever situated as you are, in the midst of everydearest connexion, and therefore I cannot expect that simply growingolder should make me indifferent about letters]
 ["Indifferent! Oh! no--I never conceived you could become indifferent.Letters are no matter of indifference; they are generally a verypositive curse]
 ["You are speaking of letters of business; mine are letters offriendship]
 ["I have often thought them the worst of the two," replied he coolly]
 [Business, you know, may bring money, but friendship hardly ever does]
 ["Ah! you are not serious now. I know Mr. John Knightley too well--I amvery sure he understands the value of friendship as well as any body. Ican easily believe that letters are very little to you, much less thanto me, but it is not your being ten years older than myself whichmakes the difference, it is not age, but situation. You have everybody dearest to you always at hand, I, probably, never shall again;and therefore till I have outlived all my affections, a post-office,I think, must always have power to draw me out, in worse weather thanto-day]
 ["When I talked of your being altered by time, by the progress of years,"said John Knightley, "I meant to imply the change of situation whichtime usually brings. I consider one as including the other. Time willgenerally lessen the interest of every attachment not within the dailycircle--but that is not the change I had in view for you. As an oldfriend, you will allow me to hope, Miss Fairfax, that ten years henceyou may have as many concentrated objects as I have]
 [It was kindly said, and very far from giving offence. A pleasant "thankyou" seemed meant to laugh it off, but a blush, a quivering lip, a tearin the eye, shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh. Her attention wasnow claimed by Mr. Woodhouse, who being, according to his custom on suchoccasions, making the circle of his guests, and paying his particularcompliments to the ladies, was ending with her--and with all his mildesturbanity, said,"I am very sorry to hear, Miss Fairfax, of your being out this morningin the rain. Young ladies should take care of themselves.--Young ladiesare delicate plants. They should take care of their health and theircomplexion. My dear, did you change your stockings?""Yes, sir, I did indeed; and I am very much obliged by your kindsolicitude about me]
 ["My dear Miss Fairfax, young ladies are very sure to be cared for.--Ihope your good grand-mama and aunt are well. They are some of my veryold friends. I wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour. Youdo us a great deal of honour to-day, I am sure. My daughter and Iare both highly sensible of your goodness, and have the greatestsatisfaction in seeing you at Hartfield]
 [The kind-hearted, polite old man might then sit down and feel that hehad done his duty, and made every fair lady welcome and easy.By this time, the walk in the rain had reached Mrs. Elton, and herremonstrances now opened upon Jane]
 [My dear Jane, what is this I hear?--Going to the post-office in therain!--This must not be, I assure you.--You sad girl, how could you dosuch a thing?--It is a sign I was not there to take care of you]
 [Jane very patiently assured her that she had not caught any cold]
 [Oh! do not tell _me_. You really are a very sad girl, and do not knowhow to take care of yourself.--To the post-office indeed! Mrs. Weston,did you ever hear the like? You and I must positively exert ourauthority]
 ["My advice," said Mrs. Weston kindly and persuasively, "I certainly dofeel tempted to give. Miss Fairfax, you must not run such risks.--Liableas you have been to severe colds, indeed you ought to be particularlycareful, especially at this time of year. The spring I always thinkrequires more than common care. Better wait an hour or two, or evenhalf a day for your letters, than run the risk of bringing on your coughagain. Now do not you feel that you had? Yes, I am sure you are much tooreasonable. You look as if you would not do such a thing again]
 ["Oh! she _shall_ _not_ do such a thing again," eagerly rejoined Mrs.Elton. "We will not allow her to do such a thing again:"--and noddingsignificantly--"there must be some arrangement made, there must indeed.I shall speak to Mr. E. The man who fetches our letters every morning(one of our men, I forget his name) shall inquire for yours too andbring them to you. That will obviate all difficulties you know; and from_us_ I really think, my dear Jane, you can have no scruple to acceptsuch an accommodation]
 ["You are extremely kind," said Jane; "but I cannot give up my earlywalk. I am advised to be out of doors as much as I can, I must walksomewhere, and the post-office is an object; and upon my word, I havescarcely ever had a bad morning before]
 ["My dear Jane, say no more about it. The thing is determined, that is(laughing affectedly) as far as I can presume to determine any thingwithout the concurrence of my lord and master. You know, Mrs. Weston,you and I must be cautious how we express ourselves. But I do flattermyself, my dear Jane, that my influence is not entirely worn out. If Imeet with no insuperable difficulties therefore, consider that point assettled]
 ["Excuse me," said Jane earnestly, "I cannot by any means consent to suchan arrangement, so needlessly troublesome to your servant. If the errandwere not a pleasure to me, it could be done, as it always is when I amnot here, by my grandmama's]
 ["Oh! my dear; but so much as Patty has to do!--And it is a kindness toemploy our men]
 [Jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered; but instead ofanswering, she began speaking again to Mr. John Knightley]
 [The post-office is a wonderful establishment!" said she.--"Theregularity and despatch of it! If one thinks of all that it has to do,and all that it does so well, it is really astonishing!""It is certainly very well regulated]
 ["So seldom that any negligence or blunder appears! So seldom thata letter, among the thousands that are constantly passing about thekingdom, is even carried wrong--and not one in a million, I suppose,actually lost! And when one considers the variety of hands, and of badhands too, that are to be deciphered, it increases the wonder]
 ["The clerks grow expert from habit.--They must begin with some quicknessof sight and hand, and exercise improves them. If you want any fartherexplanation," continued he, smiling, "they are paid for it. That isthe key to a great deal of capacity. The public pays and must be servedwell]
 [The varieties of handwriting were farther talked of, and the usualobservations made]
 [I have heard it asserted," said John Knightley, "that the same sortof handwriting often prevails in a family; and where the same masterteaches, it is natural enough. But for that reason, I should imaginethe likeness must be chiefly confined to the females, for boys have verylittle teaching after an early age, and scramble into any hand they canget. Isabella and Emma, I think, do write very much alike. I have notalways known their writing apart]
 ["Yes," said his brother hesitatingly, "there is a likeness. I know whatyou mean--but Emma's hand is the strongest]
 ["Isabella and Emma both write beautifully," said Mr. Woodhouse; "andalways did. And so does poor Mrs. Weston"--with half a sigh and half asmile at her]
 [I never saw any gentleman's handwriting"--Emma began, looking also atMrs. Weston; but stopped, on perceiving that Mrs. Weston was attendingto some one else--and the pause gave her time to reflect, "Now, how amI going to introduce him?--Am I unequal to speaking his name at oncebefore all these people? Is it necessary for me to use any roundaboutphrase?--Your Yorkshire friend--your correspondent in Yorkshire;--thatwould be the way, I suppose, if I were very bad.--No, I can pronouncehis name without the smallest distress. I certainly get better andbetter.--Now for it]
 [Mrs. Weston was disengaged and Emma began again--"Mr. Frank Churchillwrites one of the best gentleman's hands I ever saw]
 ["I do not admire it," said Mr. Knightley. "It is too small--wantsstrength. It is like a woman's writing]
 [This was not submitted to by either lady. They vindicated him againstthe base aspersion. "No, it by no means wanted strength--it was not alarge hand, but very clear and certainly strong. Had not Mrs. Weston anyletter about her to produce?" No, she had heard from him very lately,but having answered the letter, had put it away]
 [If we were in the other room," said Emma, "if I had my writing-desk, Iam sure I could produce a specimen. I have a note of his.--Do not youremember, Mrs. Weston, employing him to write for you one day?""He chose to say he was employed"--"Well, well, I have that note; and can shew it after dinner to convinceMr. Knightley]
 ["Oh! when a gallant young man, like Mr. Frank Churchill," said Mr.Knightley dryly, "writes to a fair lady like Miss Woodhouse, he will, ofcourse, put forth his best]
 [Dinner was on table.--Mrs. Elton, before she could be spoken to, wasready; and before Mr. Woodhouse had reached her with his request to beallowed to hand her into the dining-parlour, was saying--"Must I go first? I really am ashamed of always leading the way]
 [Jane's solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped Emma.She had heard and seen it all; and felt some curiosity to know whetherthe wet walk of this morning had produced any. She suspected that it_had_; that it would not have been so resolutely encountered but in fullexpectation of hearing from some one very dear, and that it had not beenin vain. She thought there was an air of greater happiness than usual--aglow both of complexion and spirits.She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the expedition and theexpense of the Irish mails;--it was at her tongue's end--but sheabstained. She was quite determined not to utter a word that should hurtJane Fairfax's feelings; and they followed the other ladies out of theroom, arm in arm, with an appearance of good-will highly becoming to thebeauty and grace of each.CHAPTER XVIIWhen the ladies returned to the drawing-room after dinner, Emma found ithardly possible to prevent their making two distinct parties;--with somuch perseverance in judging and behaving ill did Mrs. Elton engrossJane Fairfax and slight herself. She and Mrs. Weston were obliged tobe almost always either talking together or silent together. Mrs. Eltonleft them no choice. If Jane repressed her for a little time, shesoon began again; and though much that passed between them was in ahalf-whisper, especially on Mrs. Elton's side, there was no avoidinga knowledge of their principal subjects: The post-office--catchingcold--fetching letters--and friendship, were long under discussion;and to them succeeded one, which must be at least equally unpleasantto Jane--inquiries whether she had yet heard of any situation likely tosuit her, and professions of Mrs. Elton's meditated activity]
 [Here is April come!" said she, "I get quite anxious about you. Junewill soon be here]
 ["But I have never fixed on June or any other month--merely lookedforward to the summer in general]
 ["But have you really heard of nothing?""I have not even made any inquiry; I do not wish to make any yet]
 ["Oh! my dear, we cannot begin too early; you are not aware of thedifficulty of procuring exactly the desirable thing]
 ["I not aware!" said Jane, shaking her head; "dear Mrs. Elton, who canhave thought of it as I have done?""But you have not seen so much of the world as I have. You do not knowhow many candidates there always are for the _first_ situations. I sawa vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove. A cousin ofMr. Suckling, Mrs. Bragge, had such an infinity of applications; everybody was anxious to be in her family, for she moves in the first circle.Wax-candles in the schoolroom! You may imagine how desirable! Of allhouses in the kingdom Mrs. Bragge's is the one I would most wish to seeyou in]
 ["Colonel and Mrs. Campbell are to be in town again by midsummer,"said Jane. "I must spend some time with them; I am sure they will wantit;--afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose of myself. But I wouldnot wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiries at present]
 ["Trouble! aye, I know your scruples. You are afraid of giving metrouble; but I assure you, my dear Jane, the Campbells can hardly bemore interested about you than I am. I shall write to Mrs. Partridge ina day or two, and shall give her a strict charge to be on the look-outfor any thing eligible]
 ["Thank you, but I would rather you did not mention the subject toher; till the time draws nearer, I do not wish to be giving any bodytrouble]
 ["But, my dear child, the time is drawing near; here is April, and June,or say even July, is very near, with such business to accomplish beforeus. Your inexperience really amuses me! A situation such as you deserve,and your friends would require for you, is no everyday occurrence,is not obtained at a moment's notice; indeed, indeed, we must begininquiring directly]
 ["Excuse me, ma'am, but this is by no means my intention; I make noinquiry myself, and should be sorry to have any made by my friends. WhenI am quite determined as to the time, I am not at all afraid of beinglong unemployed. There are places in town, offices, where inquirywould soon produce something--Offices for the sale--not quite of humanflesh--but of human intellect]
 ["Oh! my dear, human flesh! You quite shock me; if you mean a fling atthe slave-trade, I assure you Mr. Suckling was always rather a friend tothe abolition]
 ["I did not mean, I was not thinking of the slave-trade," replied Jane;"governess-trade, I assure you, was all that I had in view; widelydifferent certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on; but as tothe greater misery of the victims, I do not know where it lies. ButI only mean to say that there are advertising offices, and that byapplying to them I should have no doubt of very soon meeting withsomething that would do]
 ["Something that would do!" repeated Mrs. Elton. "Aye, _that_ may suityour humble ideas of yourself;--I know what a modest creature you are;but it will not satisfy your friends to have you taking up with anything that may offer, any inferior, commonplace situation, in a familynot moving in a certain circle, or able to command the elegancies oflife]
 ["You are very obliging; but as to all that, I am very indifferent;it would be no object to me to be with the rich; my mortifications, Ithink, would only be the greater; I should suffer more from comparison.A gentleman's family is all that I should condition for]
 ["I know you, I know you; you would take up with any thing; but I shallbe a little more nice, and I am sure the good Campbells will be quiteon my side; with your superior talents, you have a right to move in thefirst circle. Your musical knowledge alone would entitle you to nameyour own terms, have as many rooms as you like, and mix in the familyas much as you chose;--that is--I do not know--if you knew the harp, youmight do all that, I am very sure; but you sing as well as play;--yes, Ireally believe you might, even without the harp, stipulate for whatyou chose;--and you must and shall be delightfully, honourably andcomfortably settled before the Campbells or I have any rest]
 ["You may well class the delight, the honour, and the comfort of sucha situation together," said Jane, "they are pretty sure to be equal;however, I am very serious in not wishing any thing to be attemptedat present for me. I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mrs. Elton, I amobliged to any body who feels for me, but I am quite serious in wishingnothing to be done till the summer. For two or three months longer Ishall remain where I am, and as I am]
 ["And I am quite serious too, I assure you," replied Mrs. Elton gaily,"in resolving to be always on the watch, and employing my friends towatch also, that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us]
 [In this style she ran on; never thoroughly stopped by any thing till Mr.Woodhouse came into the room; her vanity had then a change of object,and Emma heard her saying in the same half-whisper to Jane,"Here comes this dear old beau of mine, I protest!--Only think of hisgallantry in coming away before the other men!--what a dear creaturehe is;--I assure you I like him excessively. I admire all that quaint,old-fashioned politeness; it is much more to my taste than modern ease;modern ease often disgusts me. But this good old Mr. Woodhouse, I wishyou had heard his gallant speeches to me at dinner. Oh! I assure you Ibegan to think my caro sposo would be absolutely jealous. I fancy Iam rather a favourite; he took notice of my gown. How do you likeit?--Selina's choice--handsome, I think, but I do not know whether itis not over-trimmed; I have the greatest dislike to the idea of beingover-trimmed--quite a horror of finery. I must put on a few ornamentsnow, because it is expected of me. A bride, you know, must appear likea bride, but my natural taste is all for simplicity; a simple styleof dress is so infinitely preferable to finery. But I am quite in theminority, I believe; few people seem to value simplicity of dress,--showand finery are every thing. I have some notion of putting such atrimming as this to my white and silver poplin. Do you think it willlook well?"The whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing-room when Mr.Weston made his appearance among them. He had returned to a late dinner,and walked to Hartfield as soon as it was over. He had been too muchexpected by the best judges, for surprize--but there was great joy. Mr.Woodhouse was almost as glad to see him now, as he would have been sorryto see him before. John Knightley only was in mute astonishment.--Thata man who might have spent his evening quietly at home after a dayof business in London, should set off again, and walk half a mileto another man's house, for the sake of being in mixed company tillbed-time, of finishing his day in the efforts of civility and the noiseof numbers, was a circumstance to strike him deeply. A man who had beenin motion since eight o'clock in the morning, and might now have beenstill, who had been long talking, and might have been silent, who hadbeen in more than one crowd, and might have been alone!--Such a man, toquit the tranquillity and independence of his own fireside, and on theevening of a cold sleety April day rush out again into the world!--Couldhe by a touch of his finger have instantly taken back his wife, therewould have been a motive; but his coming would probably prolong ratherthan break up the party. John Knightley looked at him with amazement,then shrugged his shoulders, and said, "I could not have believed iteven of _him_]
 [Mr. Weston meanwhile, perfectly unsuspicious of the indignation he wasexciting, happy and cheerful as usual, and with all the right of beingprincipal talker, which a day spent anywhere from home confers, wasmaking himself agreeable among the rest; and having satisfied theinquiries of his wife as to his dinner, convincing her that none of allher careful directions to the servants had been forgotten, and spreadabroad what public news he had heard, was proceeding to a familycommunication, which, though principally addressed to Mrs. Weston, hehad not the smallest doubt of being highly interesting to every body inthe room. He gave her a letter, it was from Frank, and to herself; hehad met with it in his way, and had taken the liberty of opening it]
 [Read it, read it," said he, "it will give you pleasure; only a fewlines--will not take you long; read it to Emma]
 [The two ladies looked over it together; and he sat smiling and talkingto them the whole time, in a voice a little subdued, but very audible toevery body]
 [Well, he is coming, you see; good news, I think. Well, what do you sayto it?--I always told you he would be here again soon, did not I?--Anne,my dear, did not I always tell you so, and you would not believe me?--Intown next week, you see--at the latest, I dare say; for _she_ is asimpatient as the black gentleman when any thing is to be done; mostlikely they will be there to-morrow or Saturday. As to her illness, allnothing of course. But it is an excellent thing to have Frank among usagain, so near as town. They will stay a good while when they do come,and he will be half his time with us. This is precisely what I wanted.Well, pretty good news, is not it? Have you finished it? Has Emma readit all? Put it up, put it up; we will have a good talk about it someother time, but it will not do now. I shall only just mention thecircumstance to the others in a common way]
 [Mrs. Weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion. Her looksand words had nothing to restrain them. She was happy, she knew she washappy, and knew she ought to be happy. Her congratulations were warm andopen; but Emma could not speak so fluently. _She_ was a little occupiedin weighing her own feelings, and trying to understand the degree of heragitation, which she rather thought was considerable.Mr. Weston, however, too eager to be very observant, too communicativeto want others to talk, was very well satisfied with what she did say,and soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partialcommunication of what the whole room must have overheard already.It was well that he took every body's joy for granted, or he mightnot have thought either Mr. Woodhouse or Mr. Knightley particularlydelighted. They were the first entitled, after Mrs. Weston and Emma, tobe made happy;--from them he would have proceeded to Miss Fairfax, butshe was so deep in conversation with John Knightley, that it would havebeen too positive an interruption; and finding himself close to Mrs.Elton, and her attention disengaged, he necessarily began on the subjectwith her.CHAPTER XVIII"I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son to you,"said Mr. Weston.Mrs. Elton, very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended herby such a hope, smiled most graciously]
 [You have heard of a certain Frank Churchill, I presume," hecontinued--"and know him to be my son, though he does not bear my name]
 ["Oh! yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaintance. I am sure Mr.Elton will lose no time in calling on him; and we shall both have greatpleasure in seeing him at the Vicarage]
 ["You are very obliging.--Frank will be extremely happy, I am sure.--He is to be in town next week, if not sooner. We have notice of it in aletter to-day. I met the letters in my way this morning, and seeing myson's hand, presumed to open it--though it was not directed to me--itwas to Mrs. Weston. She is his principal correspondent, I assure you. Ihardly ever get a letter]
 ["And so you absolutely opened what was directed to her! Oh! Mr.Weston--(laughing affectedly) I must protest against that.--A mostdangerous precedent indeed!--I beg you will not let your neighboursfollow your example.--Upon my word, if this is what I am to expect, wemarried women must begin to exert ourselves!--Oh! Mr. Weston, I couldnot have believed it of you!""Aye, we men are sad fellows. You must take care of yourself, Mrs.Elton.--This letter tells us--it is a short letter--written in a hurry,merely to give us notice--it tells us that they are all coming up totown directly, on Mrs. Churchill's account--she has not been well thewhole winter, and thinks Enscombe too cold for her--so they are all tomove southward without loss of time]
 ["Indeed!--from Yorkshire, I think. Enscombe is in Yorkshire?""Yes, they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London, aconsiderable journey]
 ["Yes, upon my word, very considerable. Sixty-five miles farther thanfrom Maple Grove to London. But what is distance, Mr. Weston, to peopleof large fortune?--You would be amazed to hear how my brother, Mr.Suckling, sometimes flies about. You will hardly believe me--but twicein one week he and Mr. Bragge went to London and back again with fourhorses]
 ["The evil of the distance from Enscombe," said Mr. Weston, "is, thatMrs. Churchill, _as_ _we_ _understand_, has not been able to leave thesofa for a week together. In Frank's last letter she complained, hesaid, of being too weak to get into her conservatory without havingboth his arm and his uncle's! This, you know, speaks a great degree ofweakness--but now she is so impatient to be in town, that she means tosleep only two nights on the road.--So Frank writes word. Certainly,delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitutions, Mrs. Elton. Youmust grant me that]
 ["No, indeed, I shall grant you nothing. I always take the part of myown sex. I do indeed. I give you notice--You will find me a formidableantagonist on that point. I always stand up for women--and I assure you,if you knew how Selina feels with respect to sleeping at an inn, youwould not wonder at Mrs. Churchill's making incredible exertions toavoid it. Selina says it is quite horror to her--and I believe I havecaught a little of her nicety. She always travels with her own sheets;an excellent precaution. Does Mrs. Churchill do the same?""Depend upon it, Mrs. Churchill does every thing that any other finelady ever did. Mrs. Churchill will not be second to any lady in the landfor"--Mrs. Elton eagerly interposed with,"Oh! Mr. Weston, do not mistake me. Selina is no fine lady, I assureyou. Do not run away with such an idea]
 ["Is not she? Then she is no rule for Mrs. Churchill, who is as thorougha fine lady as any body ever beheld]
 [Mrs. Elton began to think she had been wrong in disclaiming so warmly.It was by no means her object to have it believed that her sister was_not_ a fine lady; perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence ofit;--and she was considering in what way she had best retract, when Mr.Weston went on]
 [Mrs. Churchill is not much in my good graces, as you may suspect--butthis is quite between ourselves. She is very fond of Frank, andtherefore I would not speak ill of her. Besides, she is out of healthnow; but _that_ indeed, by her own account, she has always been. I wouldnot say so to every body, Mrs. Elton, but I have not much faith in Mrs.Churchill's illness]
 ["If she is really ill, why not go to Bath, Mr. Weston?--To Bath, or toClifton?" "She has taken it into her head that Enscombe is too cold forher. The fact is, I suppose, that she is tired of Enscombe. She has nowbeen a longer time stationary there, than she ever was before, and shebegins to want change. It is a retired place. A fine place, but veryretired]
 ["Aye--like Maple Grove, I dare say. Nothing can stand more retired fromthe road than Maple Grove. Such an immense plantation all round it! Youseem shut out from every thing--in the most complete retirement.--AndMrs. Churchill probably has not health or spirits like Selina to enjoythat sort of seclusion. Or, perhaps she may not have resources enough inherself to be qualified for a country life. I always say a woman cannothave too many resources--and I feel very thankful that I have so manymyself as to be quite independent of society]
 ["Frank was here in February for a fortnight]
 ["So I remember to have heard. He will find an _addition_ to the societyof Highbury when he comes again; that is, if I may presume to callmyself an addition. But perhaps he may never have heard of there beingsuch a creature in the world]
 [This was too loud a call for a compliment to be passed by, and Mr.Weston, with a very good grace, immediately exclaimed,"My dear madam! Nobody but yourself could imagine such a thing possible.Not heard of you!--I believe Mrs. Weston's letters lately have been fullof very little else than Mrs. Elton]
 [He had done his duty and could return to his son]
 [When Frank left us," continued he, "it was quite uncertain when wemight see him again, which makes this day's news doubly welcome. It hasbeen completely unexpected. That is, _I_ always had a strong persuasionhe would be here again soon, I was sure something favourable would turnup--but nobody believed me. He and Mrs. Weston were both dreadfullydesponding. 'How could he contrive to come? And how could it be supposedthat his uncle and aunt would spare him again?' and so forth--I alwaysfelt that something would happen in our favour; and so it has, you see.I have observed, Mrs. Elton, in the course of my life, that if thingsare going untowardly one month, they are sure to mend the next]
 ["Very true, Mr. Weston, perfectly true. It is just what I used to say toa certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship, when, becausethings did not go quite right, did not proceed with all the rapiditywhich suited his feelings, he was apt to be in despair, and exclaim thathe was sure at this rate it would be _May_ before Hymen's saffron robewould be put on for us. Oh! the pains I have been at to dispel thosegloomy ideas and give him cheerfuller views! The carriage--we haddisappointments about the carriage;--one morning, I remember, he came tome quite in despair]
 [She was stopped by a slight fit of coughing, and Mr. Weston instantlyseized the opportunity of going on]
 [You were mentioning May. May is the very month which Mrs. Churchillis ordered, or has ordered herself, to spend in some warmer place thanEnscombe--in short, to spend in London; so that we have the agreeableprospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring--precisely theseason of the year which one should have chosen for it: days almost atthe longest; weather genial and pleasant, always inviting one out, andnever too hot for exercise. When he was here before, we made the bestof it; but there was a good deal of wet, damp, cheerless weather;there always is in February, you know, and we could not do half that weintended. Now will be the time. This will be complete enjoyment; and Ido not know, Mrs. Elton, whether the uncertainty of our meetings, thesort of constant expectation there will be of his coming in to-day orto-morrow, and at any hour, may not be more friendly to happiness thanhaving him actually in the house. I think it is so. I think it is thestate of mind which gives most spirit and delight. I hope you will bepleased with my son; but you must not expect a prodigy. He is generallythought a fine young man, but do not expect a prodigy. Mrs. Weston'spartiality for him is very great, and, as you may suppose, mostgratifying to me. She thinks nobody equal to him]
 ["And I assure you, Mr. Weston, I have very little doubt that my opinionwill be decidedly in his favour. I have heard so much in praise of Mr.Frank Churchill.--At the same time it is fair to observe, that I am oneof those who always judge for themselves, and are by no means implicitlyguided by others. I give you notice that as I find your son, so I shalljudge of him.--I am no flatterer]
 [Mr. Weston was musing]
 [I hope," said he presently, "I have not been severe upon poor Mrs.Churchill. If she is ill I should be sorry to do her injustice; butthere are some traits in her character which make it difficult for me tospeak of her with the forbearance I could wish. You cannot be ignorant,Mrs. Elton, of my connexion with the family, nor of the treatment I havemet with; and, between ourselves, the whole blame of it is to be laidto her. She was the instigator. Frank's mother would never have beenslighted as she was but for her. Mr. Churchill has pride; but his prideis nothing to his wife's: his is a quiet, indolent, gentlemanlike sortof pride that would harm nobody, and only make himself a little helplessand tiresome; but her pride is arrogance and insolence! And whatinclines one less to bear, she has no fair pretence of family or blood.She was nobody when he married her, barely the daughter of a gentleman;but ever since her being turned into a Churchill she has out-Churchill'dthem all in high and mighty claims: but in herself, I assure you, she isan upstart]
 ["Only think! well, that must be infinitely provoking! I have quitea horror of upstarts. Maple Grove has given me a thorough disgust topeople of that sort; for there is a family in that neighbourhood whoare such an annoyance to my brother and sister from the airs they givethemselves! Your description of Mrs. Churchill made me think of themdirectly. People of the name of Tupman, very lately settled there, andencumbered with many low connexions, but giving themselves immense airs,and expecting to be on a footing with the old established families.A year and a half is the very utmost that they can have lived at WestHall; and how they got their fortune nobody knows. They came fromBirmingham, which is not a place to promise much, you know, Mr. Weston.One has not great hopes from Birmingham. I always say there is somethingdireful in the sound: but nothing more is positively known of theTupmans, though a good many things I assure you are suspected; andyet by their manners they evidently think themselves equal even tomy brother, Mr. Suckling, who happens to be one of their nearestneighbours. It is infinitely too bad. Mr. Suckling, who has been elevenyears a resident at Maple Grove, and whose father had it before him--Ibelieve, at least--I am almost sure that old Mr. Suckling had completedthe purchase before his death]
 [They were interrupted. Tea was carrying round, and Mr. Weston, havingsaid all that he wanted, soon took the opportunity of walking away.After tea, Mr. and Mrs. Weston, and Mr. Elton sat down with Mr.Woodhouse to cards. The remaining five were left to their own powers,and Emma doubted their getting on very well; for Mr. Knightley seemedlittle disposed for conversation; Mrs. Elton was wanting notice, whichnobody had inclination to pay, and she was herself in a worry of spiritswhich would have made her prefer being silent.Mr. John Knightley proved more talkative than his brother. He was toleave them early the next day; and he soon began with--"Well, Emma, I do not believe I have any thing more to say about theboys; but you have your sister's letter, and every thing is down at fulllength there we may be sure. My charge would be much more concise thanher's, and probably not much in the same spirit; all that I have torecommend being comprised in, do not spoil them, and do not physicthem]
 ["I rather hope to satisfy you both," said Emma, "for I shall do allin my power to make them happy, which will be enough for Isabella; andhappiness must preclude false indulgence and physic]
 ["And if you find them troublesome, you must send them home again]
 ["That is very likely. You think so, do not you?""I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for your father--or evenmay be some encumbrance to you, if your visiting engagements continue toincrease as much as they have done lately]
 ["Increase!""Certainly; you must be sensible that the last half-year has made agreat difference in your way of life]
 ["Difference! No indeed I am not]
 ["There can be no doubt of your being much more engaged with company thanyou used to be. Witness this very time. Here am I come down for onlyone day, and you are engaged with a dinner-party!--When did it happenbefore, or any thing like it? Your neighbourhood is increasing, and youmix more with it. A little while ago, every letter to Isabella broughtan account of fresh gaieties; dinners at Mr. Cole's, or balls at theCrown. The difference which Randalls, Randalls alone makes in yourgoings-on, is very great]
 ["Yes," said his brother quickly, "it is Randalls that does it all]
 ["Very well--and as Randalls, I suppose, is not likely to have lessinfluence than heretofore, it strikes me as a possible thing, Emma, thatHenry and John may be sometimes in the way. And if they are, I only begyou to send them home]
 ["No," cried Mr. Knightley, "that need not be the consequence. Let thembe sent to Donwell. I shall certainly be at leisure]
 ["Upon my word," exclaimed Emma, "you amuse me! I should like to know howmany of all my numerous engagements take place without your being ofthe party; and why I am to be supposed in danger of wanting leisure toattend to the little boys. These amazing engagements of mine--what havethey been? Dining once with the Coles--and having a ball talked of,which never took place. I can understand you--(nodding at Mr. JohnKnightley)--your good fortune in meeting with so many of your friends atonce here, delights you too much to pass unnoticed. But you, (turning toMr. Knightley,) who know how very, very seldom I am ever two hours fromHartfield, why you should foresee such a series of dissipation for me, Icannot imagine. And as to my dear little boys, I must say, that if AuntEmma has not time for them, I do not think they would fare much betterwith Uncle Knightley, who is absent from home about five hours where sheis absent one--and who, when he is at home, is either reading to himselfor settling his accounts]
 [Mr. Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile; and succeeded withoutdifficulty, upon Mrs. Elton's beginning to talk to him.VOLUME IIICHAPTER IA very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy Emma as to thenature of her agitation on hearing this news of Frank Churchill. Shewas soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at allapprehensive or embarrassed; it was for him. Her own attachment hadreally subsided into a mere nothing; it was not worth thinking of;--butif he, who had undoubtedly been always so much the most in love of thetwo, were to be returning with the same warmth of sentiment which he hadtaken away, it would be very distressing. If a separation of twomonths should not have cooled him, there were dangers and evils beforeher:--caution for him and for herself would be necessary. She didnot mean to have her own affections entangled again, and it would beincumbent on her to avoid any encouragement of his.She wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration.That would be so very painful a conclusion of their presentacquaintance! and yet, she could not help rather anticipating somethingdecisive. She felt as if the spring would not pass without bringing acrisis, an event, a something to alter her present composed and tranquilstate.It was not very long, though rather longer than Mr. Weston had foreseen,before she had the power of forming some opinion of Frank Churchill'sfeelings. The Enscombe family were not in town quite so soon as had beenimagined, but he was at Highbury very soon afterwards. He rode downfor a couple of hours; he could not yet do more; but as he came fromRandalls immediately to Hartfield, she could then exercise all her quickobservation, and speedily determine how he was influenced, and how shemust act. They met with the utmost friendliness. There could be no doubtof his great pleasure in seeing her. But she had an almost instant doubtof his caring for her as he had done, of his feeling the same tendernessin the same degree. She watched him well. It was a clear thing he wasless in love than he had been. Absence, with the conviction probablyof her indifference, had produced this very natural and very desirableeffect.He was in high spirits; as ready to talk and laugh as ever, and seemeddelighted to speak of his former visit, and recur to old stories: and hewas not without agitation. It was not in his calmness that she readhis comparative difference. He was not calm; his spirits were evidentlyfluttered; there was restlessness about him. Lively as he was, it seemeda liveliness that did not satisfy himself; but what decided her beliefon the subject, was his staying only a quarter of an hour, and hurryingaway to make other calls in Highbury. "He had seen a group of oldacquaintance in the street as he passed--he had not stopped, he wouldnot stop for more than a word--but he had the vanity to think they wouldbe disappointed if he did not call, and much as he wished to stay longerat Hartfield, he must hurry off]
 [ She had no doubt as to his being lessin love--but neither his agitated spirits, nor his hurrying away, seemedlike a perfect cure; and she was rather inclined to think it implied adread of her returning power, and a discreet resolution of not trustinghimself with her long.This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten days.He was often hoping, intending to come--but was always prevented. Hisaunt could not bear to have him leave her. Such was his own account atRandall's. If he were quite sincere, if he really tried to come, it wasto be inferred that Mrs. Churchill's removal to London had been of noservice to the wilful or nervous part of her disorder. That she wasreally ill was very certain; he had declared himself convinced of it, atRandalls. Though much might be fancy, he could not doubt, when he lookedback, that she was in a weaker state of health than she had been half ayear ago. He did not believe it to proceed from any thing that careand medicine might not remove, or at least that she might not have manyyears of existence before her; but he could not be prevailed on, by allhis father's doubts, to say that her complaints were merely imaginary,or that she was as strong as ever.It soon appeared that London was not the place for her. She couldnot endure its noise. Her nerves were under continual irritation andsuffering; and by the ten days' end, her nephew's letter to Randallscommunicated a change of plan. They were going to remove immediately toRichmond. Mrs. Churchill had been recommended to the medical skill ofan eminent person there, and had otherwise a fancy for the place. Aready-furnished house in a favourite spot was engaged, and much benefitexpected from the change.Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangement,and seemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having two monthsbefore him of such near neighbourhood to many dear friends--for thehouse was taken for May and June. She was told that now he wrote withthe greatest confidence of being often with them, almost as often as hecould even wish.Emma saw how Mr. Weston understood these joyous prospects. He wasconsidering her as the source of all the happiness they offered. Shehoped it was not so. Two months must bring it to the proof.Mr. Weston's own happiness was indisputable. He was quite delighted.It was the very circumstance he could have wished for. Now, it would bereally having Frank in their neighbourhood. What were nine miles toa young man?--An hour's ride. He would be always coming over. Thedifference in that respect of Richmond and London was enough to makethe whole difference of seeing him always and seeing him never. Sixteenmiles--nay, eighteen--it must be full eighteen to Manchester-street--wasa serious obstacle. Were he ever able to get away, the day would bespent in coming and returning. There was no comfort in having him inLondon; he might as well be at Enscombe; but Richmond was the verydistance for easy intercourse. Better than nearer!One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by thisremoval,--the ball at the Crown. It had not been forgotten before,but it had been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day. Now,however, it was absolutely to be; every preparation was resumed, andvery soon after the Churchills had removed to Richmond, a few lines fromFrank, to say that his aunt felt already much better for the change, andthat he had no doubt of being able to join them for twenty-four hours atany given time, induced them to name as early a day as possible.Mr. Weston's ball was to be a real thing. A very few to-morrows stoodbetween the young people of Highbury and happiness.Mr. Woodhouse was resigned. The time of year lightened the evil to him.May was better for every thing than February. Mrs. Bates was engaged tospend the evening at Hartfield, James had due notice, and he sanguinelyhoped that neither dear little Henry nor dear little John would have anything the matter with them, while dear Emma were gone.CHAPTER IINo misfortune occurred, again to prevent the ball. The day approached,the day arrived; and after a morning of some anxious watching, FrankChurchill, in all the certainty of his own self, reached Randalls beforedinner, and every thing was safe.No second meeting had there yet been between him and Emma. The roomat the Crown was to witness it;--but it would be better than acommon meeting in a crowd. Mr. Weston had been so very earnest in hisentreaties for her arriving there as soon as possible after themselves,for the purpose of taking her opinion as to the propriety and comfort ofthe rooms before any other persons came, that she could not refuse him,and must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man's company.She was to convey Harriet, and they drove to the Crown in good time, theRandalls party just sufficiently before them.Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch; and though he did notsay much, his eyes declared that he meant to have a delightful evening.They all walked about together, to see that every thing was as it shouldbe; and within a few minutes were joined by the contents of anothercarriage, which Emma could not hear the sound of at first, without greatsurprize. "So unreasonably early!" she was going to exclaim; but shepresently found that it was a family of old friends, who were coming,like herself, by particular desire, to help Mr. Weston's judgment; andthey were so very closely followed by another carriage of cousins,who had been entreated to come early with the same distinguishingearnestness, on the same errand, that it seemed as if half the companymight soon be collected together for the purpose of preparatoryinspection.Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr. Westondepended, and felt, that to be the favourite and intimate of a manwho had so many intimates and confidantes, was not the very firstdistinction in the scale of vanity. She liked his open manners, buta little less of open-heartedness would have made him a highercharacter.--General benevolence, but not general friendship, made aman what he ought to be.--She could fancy such a man. The whole partywalked about, and looked, and praised again; and then, having nothingelse to do, formed a sort of half-circle round the fire, to observein their various modes, till other subjects were started, that, though_May_, a fire in the evening was still very pleasant.Emma found that it was not Mr. Weston's fault that the number of privycouncillors was not yet larger. They had stopped at Mrs. Bates's doorto offer the use of their carriage, but the aunt and niece were to bebrought by the Eltons.Frank was standing by her, but not steadily; there was a restlessness,which shewed a mind not at ease. He was looking about, he was going tothe door, he was watching for the sound of other carriages,--impatientto begin, or afraid of being always near her.Mrs. Elton was spoken of. "I think she must be here soon," said he. "Ihave a great curiosity to see Mrs. Elton, I have heard so much of her.It cannot be long, I think, before she comes]
 [A carriage was heard. He was on the move immediately; but coming back,said,"I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her. I have never seeneither Mr. or Mrs. Elton. I have no business to put myself forward]
 [Mr. and Mrs. Elton appeared; and all the smiles and the proprietiespassed]
 [But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax!" said Mr. Weston, looking about. "Wethought you were to bring them]
 [The mistake had been slight. The carriage was sent for them now. Emmalonged to know what Frank's first opinion of Mrs. Elton might be; howhe was affected by the studied elegance of her dress, and her smiles ofgraciousness. He was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion,by giving her very proper attention, after the introduction had passed.In a few minutes the carriage returned.--Somebody talked of rain.--"Iwill see that there are umbrellas, sir," said Frank to his father:"Miss Bates must not be forgotten:" and away he went. Mr. Weston wasfollowing; but Mrs. Elton detained him, to gratify him by her opinionof his son; and so briskly did she begin, that the young man himself,though by no means moving slowly, could hardly be out of hearing]
 [A very fine young man indeed, Mr. Weston. You know I candidly told youI should form my own opinion; and I am happy to say that I am extremelypleased with him.--You may believe me. I never compliment. I think hima very handsome young man, and his manners are precisely what I like andapprove--so truly the gentleman, without the least conceit or puppyism.You must know I have a vast dislike to puppies--quite a horror of them.They were never tolerated at Maple Grove. Neither Mr. Suckling norme had ever any patience with them; and we used sometimes to say verycutting things! Selina, who is mild almost to a fault, bore with themmuch better]
 [While she talked of his son, Mr. Weston's attention was chained; butwhen she got to Maple Grove, he could recollect that there were ladiesjust arriving to be attended to, and with happy smiles must hurry away.Mrs. Elton turned to Mrs. Weston. "I have no doubt of its being ourcarriage with Miss Bates and Jane. Our coachman and horses are soextremely expeditious!--I believe we drive faster than any body.--Whata pleasure it is to send one's carriage for a friend!--I understand youwere so kind as to offer, but another time it will be quite unnecessary.You may be very sure I shall always take care of _them_]
 [Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two gentlemen, walked intothe room; and Mrs. Elton seemed to think it as much her duty as Mrs.Weston's to receive them. Her gestures and movements might be understoodby any one who looked on like Emma; but her words, every body's words,were soon lost under the incessant flow of Miss Bates, who came intalking, and had not finished her speech under many minutes after herbeing admitted into the circle at the fire. As the door opened she washeard,"So very obliging of you!--No rain at all. Nothing to signify. I do notcare for myself. Quite thick shoes. And Jane declares--Well!--(as soonas she was within the door) Well! This is brilliant indeed!--This isadmirable!--Excellently contrived, upon my word. Nothing wanting. Couldnot have imagined it.--So well lighted up!--Jane, Jane, look!--did youever see any thing? Oh! Mr. Weston, you must really have had Aladdin'slamp. Good Mrs. Stokes would not know her own room again. I saw her asI came in; she was standing in the entrance. 'Oh! Mrs. Stokes,' saidI--but I had not time for more]
 [ She was now met by Mrs. Weston.--"Verywell, I thank you, ma'am. I hope you are quite well. Very happy to hearit. So afraid you might have a headache!--seeing you pass by so often,and knowing how much trouble you must have. Delighted to hear it indeed.Ah! dear Mrs. Elton, so obliged to you for the carriage!--excellenttime. Jane and I quite ready. Did not keep the horses a moment. Mostcomfortable carriage.--Oh! and I am sure our thanks are due to you,Mrs. Weston, on that score. Mrs. Elton had most kindly sent Jane a note,or we should have been.--But two such offers in one day!--Never weresuch neighbours. I said to my mother, 'Upon my word, ma'am--]
 [ Thankyou, my mother is remarkably well. Gone to Mr. Woodhouse's. I made hertake her shawl--for the evenings are not warm--her large new shawl--Mrs. Dixon's wedding-present.--So kind of her to think of my mother!Bought at Weymouth, you know--Mr. Dixon's choice. There were threeothers, Jane says, which they hesitated about some time. ColonelCampbell rather preferred an olive. My dear Jane, are you sure you didnot wet your feet?--It was but a drop or two, but I am so afraid:--butMr. Frank Churchill was so extremely--and there was a mat to stepupon--I shall never forget his extreme politeness.--Oh! Mr. FrankChurchill, I must tell you my mother's spectacles have never been infault since; the rivet never came out again. My mother often talks ofyour good-nature. Does not she, Jane?--Do not we often talk of Mr. FrankChurchill?--Ah! here's Miss Woodhouse.--Dear Miss Woodhouse, how doyou do?--Very well I thank you, quite well. This is meeting quitein fairy-land!--Such a transformation!--Must not compliment, I know(eyeing Emma most complacently)--that would be rude--but upon my word,Miss Woodhouse, you do look--how do you like Jane's hair?--You area judge.--She did it all herself. Quite wonderful how she does herhair!--No hairdresser from London I think could.--Ah! Dr. Hughes Ideclare--and Mrs. Hughes. Must go and speak to Dr. and Mrs. Hughes for amoment.--How do you do? How do you do?--Very well, I thank you. Thisis delightful, is not it?--Where's dear Mr. Richard?--Oh! there he is.Don't disturb him. Much better employed talking to the young ladies. Howdo you do, Mr. Richard?--I saw you the other day as you rode throughthe town--Mrs. Otway, I protest!--and good Mr. Otway, and Miss Otwayand Miss Caroline.--Such a host of friends!--and Mr. George and Mr.Arthur!--How do you do? How do you all do?--Quite well, I am muchobliged to you. Never better.--Don't I hear another carriage?--Who canthis be?--very likely the worthy Coles.--Upon my word, this is charmingto be standing about among such friends! And such a noble fire!--I amquite roasted. No coffee, I thank you, for me--never take coffee.--Alittle tea if you please, sir, by and bye,--no hurry--Oh! here it comes.Every thing so good!"Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma; and as soon as MissBates was quiet, she found herself necessarily overhearing the discourseof Mrs. Elton and Miss Fairfax, who were standing a little way behindher.--He was thoughtful. Whether he were overhearing too, she could notdetermine. After a good many compliments to Jane on her dress and look,compliments very quietly and properly taken, Mrs. Elton was evidentlywanting to be complimented herself--and it was, "How do you likemy gown?--How do you like my trimming?--How has Wright done myhair?"--with many other relative questions, all answered with patientpoliteness. Mrs. Elton then said, "Nobody can think less of dress ingeneral than I do--but upon such an occasion as this, when every body'seyes are so much upon me, and in compliment to the Westons--who I haveno doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour--I would not wishto be inferior to others. And I see very few pearls in the room exceptmine.--So Frank Churchill is a capital dancer, I understand.--We shallsee if our styles suit.--A fine young man certainly is Frank Churchill.I like him very well]
 [At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that Emma could notbut imagine he had overheard his own praises, and did not want to hearmore;--and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, tillanother suspension brought Mrs. Elton's tones again distinctlyforward.--Mr. Elton had just joined them, and his wife was exclaiming,"Oh! you have found us out at last, have you, in our seclusion?--I wasthis moment telling Jane, I thought you would begin to be impatient fortidings of us]
 ["Jane!"--repeated Frank Churchill, with a look of surprize anddispleasure.--"That is easy--but Miss Fairfax does not disapprove it, Isuppose]
 ["How do you like Mrs. Elton?" said Emma in a whisper]
 [Not at all]
 ["You are ungrateful]
 ["Ungrateful!--What do you mean?" Then changing from a frown to asmile--"No, do not tell me--I do not want to know what you mean.--Whereis my father?--When are we to begin dancing?"Emma could hardly understand him; he seemed in an odd humour. He walkedoff to find his father, but was quickly back again with both Mr. andMrs. Weston. He had met with them in a little perplexity, which must belaid before Emma. It had just occurred to Mrs. Weston that Mrs. Eltonmust be asked to begin the ball; that she would expect it; whichinterfered with all their wishes of giving Emma that distinction.--Emmaheard the sad truth with fortitude]
 [And what are we to do for a proper partner for her?" said Mr. Weston]
 [She will think Frank ought to ask her]
 [Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former promise; andboasted himself an engaged man, which his father looked his most perfectapprobation of--and it then appeared that Mrs. Weston was wanting _him_to dance with Mrs. Elton himself, and that their business was to help topersuade him into it, which was done pretty soon.--Mr. Weston and Mrs.Elton led the way, Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse followed.Emma must submit to stand second to Mrs. Elton, though she had alwaysconsidered the ball as peculiarly for her. It was almost enough to makeher think of marrying. Mrs. Elton had undoubtedly the advantage, at thistime, in vanity completely gratified; for though she had intended tobegin with Frank Churchill, she could not lose by the change. Mr. Westonmight be his son's superior.--In spite of this little rub, however,Emma was smiling with enjoyment, delighted to see the respectable lengthof the set as it was forming, and to feel that she had so many hoursof unusual festivity before her.--She was more disturbed by Mr.Knightley's not dancing than by any thing else.--There he was, amongthe standers-by, where he ought not to be; he ought to be dancing,--notclassing himself with the husbands, and fathers, and whist-players, whowere pretending to feel an interest in the dance till their rubbers weremade up,--so young as he looked!--He could not have appeared to greateradvantage perhaps anywhere, than where he had placed himself. His tall,firm, upright figure, among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders ofthe elderly men, was such as Emma felt must draw every body's eyes;and, excepting her own partner, there was not one among the whole row ofyoung men who could be compared with him.--He moved a few steps nearer,and those few steps were enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner,with what natural grace, he must have danced, would he but take thetrouble.--Whenever she caught his eye, she forced him to smile; butin general he was looking grave. She wished he could love a ballroombetter, and could like Frank Churchill better.--He seemed oftenobserving her. She must not flatter herself that he thought of herdancing, but if he were criticising her behaviour, she did not feelafraid. There was nothing like flirtation between her and her partner.They seemed more like cheerful, easy friends, than lovers. That FrankChurchill thought less of her than he had done, was indubitable.The ball proceeded pleasantly. The anxious cares, the incessantattentions of Mrs. Weston, were not thrown away. Every body seemedhappy; and the praise of being a delightful ball, which is seldombestowed till after a ball has ceased to be, was repeatedly given inthe very beginning of the existence of this. Of very important, veryrecordable events, it was not more productive than such meetings usuallyare. There was one, however, which Emma thought something of.--The twolast dances before supper were begun, and Harriet had no partner;--theonly young lady sitting down;--and so equal had been hitherto thenumber of dancers, that how there could be any one disengaged was thewonder!--But Emma's wonder lessened soon afterwards, on seeing Mr. Eltonsauntering about. He would not ask Harriet to dance if it were possibleto be avoided: she was sure he would not--and she was expecting himevery moment to escape into the card-room.Escape, however, was not his plan. He came to the part of the room wherethe sitters-by were collected, spoke to some, and walked about in frontof them, as if to shew his liberty, and his resolution of maintainingit. He did not omit being sometimes directly before Miss Smith, orspeaking to those who were close to her.--Emma saw it. She was not yetdancing; she was working her way up from the bottom, and had thereforeleisure to look around, and by only turning her head a little she sawit all. When she was half-way up the set, the whole group were exactlybehind her, and she would no longer allow her eyes to watch; but Mr.Elton was so near, that she heard every syllable of a dialogue whichjust then took place between him and Mrs. Weston; and she perceived thathis wife, who was standing immediately above her, was not onlylistening also, but even encouraging him by significant glances.--Thekind-hearted, gentle Mrs. Weston had left her seat to join him and say,"Do not you dance, Mr. Elton?" to which his prompt reply was, "Mostreadily, Mrs. Weston, if you will dance with me]
 ["Me!--oh! no--I would get you a better partner than myself. I am nodancer]
 ["If Mrs. Gilbert wishes to dance," said he, "I shall have greatpleasure, I am sure--for, though beginning to feel myself rather an oldmarried man, and that my dancing days are over, it would give me verygreat pleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like Mrs.Gilbert]
 ["Mrs. Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a young ladydisengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing--Miss Smith]
 [ "MissSmith!--oh!--I had not observed.--You are extremely obliging--and if Iwere not an old married man.--But my dancing days are over, Mrs. Weston.You will excuse me. Any thing else I should be most happy to do, at yourcommand--but my dancing days are over]
 [Mrs. Weston said no more; and Emma could imagine with what surprize andmortification she must be returning to her seat. This was Mr. Elton! theamiable, obliging, gentle Mr. Elton.--She looked round for a moment; hehad joined Mr. Knightley at a little distance, and was arranging himselffor settled conversation, while smiles of high glee passed between himand his wife.She would not look again. Her heart was in a glow, and she feared herface might be as hot.In another moment a happier sight caught her;--Mr. Knightley leadingHarriet to the set!--Never had she been more surprized, seldom moredelighted, than at that instant. She was all pleasure and gratitude,both for Harriet and herself, and longed to be thanking him; and thoughtoo distant for speech, her countenance said much, as soon as she couldcatch his eye again.His dancing proved to be just what she had believed it, extremely good;and Harriet would have seemed almost too lucky, if it had not been forthe cruel state of things before, and for the very complete enjoymentand very high sense of the distinction which her happy featuresannounced. It was not thrown away on her, she bounded higher than ever,flew farther down the middle, and was in a continual course of smiles.Mr. Elton had retreated into the card-room, looking (Emma trusted) veryfoolish. She did not think he was quite so hardened as his wife, thoughgrowing very like her;--_she_ spoke some of her feelings, by observingaudibly to her partner,"Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith!--Very good-natured,I declare]
 [Supper was announced. The move began; and Miss Bates might be heard fromthat moment, without interruption, till her being seated at table andtaking up her spoon]
 [Jane, Jane, my dear Jane, where are you?--Here is your tippet. Mrs.Weston begs you to put on your tippet. She says she is afraid there willbe draughts in the passage, though every thing has been done--One doornailed up--Quantities of matting--My dear Jane, indeed you must.Mr. Churchill, oh! you are too obliging! How well you put it on!--sogratified! Excellent dancing indeed!--Yes, my dear, I ran home, as Isaid I should, to help grandmama to bed, and got back again, andnobody missed me.--I set off without saying a word, just as I told you.Grandmama was quite well, had a charming evening with Mr. Woodhouse, avast deal of chat, and backgammon.--Tea was made downstairs, biscuitsand baked apples and wine before she came away: amazing luck in someof her throws: and she inquired a great deal about you, how you wereamused, and who were your partners. 'Oh!' said I, 'I shall not forestallJane; I left her dancing with Mr. George Otway; she will love to tellyou all about it herself to-morrow: her first partner was Mr. Elton,I do not know who will ask her next, perhaps Mr. William Cox]
 [ My dearsir, you are too obliging.--Is there nobody you would not rather?--I amnot helpless. Sir, you are most kind. Upon my word, Jane on one arm, andme on the other!--Stop, stop, let us stand a little back, Mrs. Elton isgoing; dear Mrs. Elton, how elegant she looks!--Beautiful lace!--Now weall follow in her train. Quite the queen of the evening!--Well, here weare at the passage. Two steps, Jane, take care of the two steps. Oh! no,there is but one. Well, I was persuaded there were two. How very odd!I was convinced there were two, and there is but one. I never saw anything equal to the comfort and style--Candles everywhere.--I was tellingyou of your grandmama, Jane,--There was a little disappointment.--Thebaked apples and biscuits, excellent in their way, you know; but therewas a delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagus brought in atfirst, and good Mr. Woodhouse, not thinking the asparagus quite boiledenough, sent it all out again. Now there is nothing grandmama lovesbetter than sweetbread and asparagus--so she was rather disappointed,but we agreed we would not speak of it to any body, for fear ofits getting round to dear Miss Woodhouse, who would be so very muchconcerned!--Well, this is brilliant! I am all amazement! could not havesupposed any thing!--Such elegance and profusion!--I have seen nothinglike it since--Well, where shall we sit? where shall we sit? Anywhere,so that Jane is not in a draught. Where _I_ sit is of no consequence.Oh! do you recommend this side?--Well, I am sure, Mr. Churchill--onlyit seems too good--but just as you please. What you direct in this housecannot be wrong. Dear Jane, how shall we ever recollect half the dishesfor grandmama? Soup too! Bless me! I should not be helped so soon, butit smells most excellent, and I cannot help beginning]
 [Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr. Knightley till after supper;but, when they were all in the ballroom again, her eyes invitedhim irresistibly to come to her and be thanked. He was warm in hisreprobation of Mr. Elton's conduct; it had been unpardonable rudeness;and Mrs. Elton's looks also received the due share of censure]
 [They aimed at wounding more than Harriet," said he. "Emma, why is itthat they are your enemies?"He looked with smiling penetration; and, on receiving no answer, added,"_She_ ought not to be angry with you, I suspect, whatever he maybe.--To that surmise, you say nothing, of course; but confess, Emma,that you did want him to marry Harriet]
 ["I did," replied Emma, "and they cannot forgive me]
 [He shook his head; but there was a smile of indulgence with it, and heonly said,"I shall not scold you. I leave you to your own reflections]
 ["Can you trust me with such flatterers?--Does my vain spirit ever tellme I am wrong?""Not your vain spirit, but your serious spirit.--If one leads you wrong,I am sure the other tells you of it]
 ["I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr. Elton. There isa littleness about him which you discovered, and which I did not: and Iwas fully convinced of his being in love with Harriet. It was through aseries of strange blunders!""And, in return for your acknowledging so much, I will do you thejustice to say, that you would have chosen for him better than he haschosen for himself.--Harriet Smith has some first-rate qualities, whichMrs. Elton is totally without. An unpretending, single-minded, artlessgirl--infinitely to be preferred by any man of sense and taste to such awoman as Mrs. Elton. I found Harriet more conversable than I expected]
 [Emma was extremely gratified.--They were interrupted by the bustle ofMr. Weston calling on every body to begin dancing again]
 [Come Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fairfax, what are you alldoing?--Come Emma, set your companions the example. Every body is lazy!Every body is asleep!""I am ready," said Emma, "whenever I am wanted]
 ["Whom are you going to dance with?" asked Mr. Knightley.She hesitated a moment, and then replied, "With you, if you will askme]
 ["Will you?" said he, offering his hand]
 [Indeed I will. You have shewn that you can dance, and you know we arenot really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper]
 ["Brother and sister! no, indeed]
 [CHAPTER IIIThis little explanation with Mr. Knightley gave Emma considerablepleasure. It was one of the agreeable recollections of the ball, whichshe walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy.--She was extremelyglad that they had come to so good an understanding respecting theEltons, and that their opinions of both husband and wife were so muchalike; and his praise of Harriet, his concession in her favour, waspeculiarly gratifying. The impertinence of the Eltons, which for a fewminutes had threatened to ruin the rest of her evening, had been theoccasion of some of its highest satisfactions; and she looked forwardto another happy result--the cure of Harriet's infatuation.--FromHarriet's manner of speaking of the circumstance before they quitted theballroom, she had strong hopes. It seemed as if her eyes were suddenlyopened, and she were enabled to see that Mr. Elton was not the superiorcreature she had believed him. The fever was over, and Emma couldharbour little fear of the pulse being quickened again by injuriouscourtesy. She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons forsupplying all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be fartherrequisite.--Harriet rational, Frank Churchill not too much in love, andMr. Knightley not wanting to quarrel with her, how very happy a summermust be before her!She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning. He had told her that hecould not allow himself the pleasure of stopping at Hartfield, as he wasto be at home by the middle of the day. She did not regret it.Having arranged all these matters, looked them through, and put them allto rights, she was just turning to the house with spirits freshened upfor the demands of the two little boys, as well as of their grandpapa,when the great iron sweep-gate opened, and two persons entered whom shehad never less expected to see together--Frank Churchill, with Harrietleaning on his arm--actually Harriet!--A moment sufficed to convinceher that something extraordinary had happened. Harriet looked whiteand frightened, and he was trying to cheer her.--The iron gates and thefront-door were not twenty yards asunder;--they were all three soon inthe hall, and Harriet immediately sinking into a chair fainted away.A young lady who faints, must be recovered; questions must be answered,and surprizes be explained. Such events are very interesting, but thesuspense of them cannot last long. A few minutes made Emma acquaintedwith the whole.Miss Smith, and Miss Bickerton, another parlour boarder at Mrs.Goddard's, who had been also at the ball, had walked out together, andtaken a road, the Richmond road, which, though apparently public enoughfor safety, had led them into alarm.--About half a mile beyond Highbury,making a sudden turn, and deeply shaded by elms on each side, it becamefor a considerable stretch very retired; and when the young ladieshad advanced some way into it, they had suddenly perceived at a smalldistance before them, on a broader patch of greensward by the side, aparty of gipsies. A child on the watch, came towards them to beg; andMiss Bickerton, excessively frightened, gave a great scream, and callingon Harriet to follow her, ran up a steep bank, cleared a slight hedge atthe top, and made the best of her way by a short cut back to Highbury.But poor Harriet could not follow. She had suffered very much from crampafter dancing, and her first attempt to mount the bank brought on sucha return of it as made her absolutely powerless--and in this state, andexceedingly terrified, she had been obliged to remain.How the trampers might have behaved, had the young ladies been morecourageous, must be doubtful; but such an invitation for attack couldnot be resisted; and Harriet was soon assailed by half a dozen children,headed by a stout woman and a great boy, all clamorous, and impertinentin look, though not absolutely in word.--More and more frightened, sheimmediately promised them money, and taking out her purse, gave them ashilling, and begged them not to want more, or to use her ill.--Shewas then able to walk, though but slowly, and was moving away--but herterror and her purse were too tempting, and she was followed, or rathersurrounded, by the whole gang, demanding more.In this state Frank Churchill had found her, she trembling andconditioning, they loud and insolent. By a most fortunate chance hisleaving Highbury had been delayed so as to bring him to her assistanceat this critical moment. The pleasantness of the morning had inducedhim to walk forward, and leave his horses to meet him by another road,a mile or two beyond Highbury--and happening to have borrowed a pairof scissors the night before of Miss Bates, and to have forgotten torestore them, he had been obliged to stop at her door, and go in for afew minutes: he was therefore later than he had intended; and beingon foot, was unseen by the whole party till almost close to them. Theterror which the woman and boy had been creating in Harriet was thentheir own portion. He had left them completely frightened; and Harrieteagerly clinging to him, and hardly able to speak, had just strengthenough to reach Hartfield, before her spirits were quite overcome.It was his idea to bring her to Hartfield: he had thought of no otherplace.This was the amount of the whole story,--of his communication and ofHarriet's as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech.--He darednot stay longer than to see her well; these several delays left himnot another minute to lose; and Emma engaging to give assurance of hersafety to Mrs. Goddard, and notice of there being such a set of peoplein the neighbourhood to Mr. Knightley, he set off, with all the gratefulblessings that she could utter for her friend and herself.Such an adventure as this,--a fine young man and a lovely young womanthrown together in such a way, could hardly fail of suggesting certainideas to the coldest heart and the steadiest brain. So Emma thought, atleast. Could a linguist, could a grammarian, could even a mathematicianhave seen what she did, have witnessed their appearance together, andheard their history of it, without feeling that circumstances had beenat work to make them peculiarly interesting to each other?--How muchmore must an imaginist, like herself, be on fire with speculation andforesight!--especially with such a groundwork of anticipation as hermind had already made.It was a very extraordinary thing! Nothing of the sort had everoccurred before to any young ladies in the place, within her memory; norencontre, no alarm of the kind;--and now it had happened to the veryperson, and at the very hour, when the other very person was chancingto pass by to rescue her!--It certainly was very extraordinary!--Andknowing, as she did, the favourable state of mind of each at thisperiod, it struck her the more. He was wishing to get the better of hisattachment to herself, she just recovering from her mania for Mr. Elton.It seemed as if every thing united to promise the most interestingconsequences. It was not possible that the occurrence should not bestrongly recommending each to the other.In the few minutes' conversation which she had yet had with him, whileHarriet had been partially insensible, he had spoken of her terror,her naivete, her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm, with asensibility amused and delighted; and just at last, after Harriet'sown account had been given, he had expressed his indignation at theabominable folly of Miss Bickerton in the warmest terms. Every thing wasto take its natural course, however, neither impelled nor assisted.She would not stir a step, nor drop a hint. No, she had had enough ofinterference. There could be no harm in a scheme, a mere passive scheme.It was no more than a wish. Beyond it she would on no account proceed.Emma's first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledge ofwhat had passed,--aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion: butshe soon felt that concealment must be impossible. Within half an hourit was known all over Highbury. It was the very event to engage thosewho talk most, the young and the low; and all the youth and servants inthe place were soon in the happiness of frightful news. The last night'sball seemed lost in the gipsies. Poor Mr. Woodhouse trembled as he sat,and, as Emma had foreseen, would scarcely be satisfied without theirpromising never to go beyond the shrubbery again. It was some comfortto him that many inquiries after himself and Miss Woodhouse (for hisneighbours knew that he loved to be inquired after), as well as MissSmith, were coming in during the rest of the day; and he hadthe pleasure of returning for answer, that they were all veryindifferent--which, though not exactly true, for she was perfectly well,and Harriet not much otherwise, Emma would not interfere with. She hadan unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man,for she hardly knew what indisposition was; and if he did not inventillnesses for her, she could make no figure in a message.The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice; they tookthemselves off in a hurry. The young ladies of Highbury might havewalked again in safety before their panic began, and the whole historydwindled soon into a matter of little importance but to Emma and hernephews:--in her imagination it maintained its ground, and Henry andJohn were still asking every day for the story of Harriet and thegipsies, and still tenaciously setting her right if she varied in theslightest particular from the original recital.CHAPTER IVA very few days had passed after this adventure, when Harriet came onemorning to Emma with a small parcel in her hand, and after sitting downand hesitating, thus began:"Miss Woodhouse--if you are at leisure--I have something that I shouldlike to tell you--a sort of confession to make--and then, you know, itwill be over]
 [Emma was a good deal surprized; but begged her to speak. There was aseriousness in Harriet's manner which prepared her, quite as much as herwords, for something more than ordinary]
 [It is my duty, and I am sure it is my wish," she continued, "to haveno reserves with you on this subject. As I am happily quite an alteredcreature in _one_ _respect_, it is very fit that you should havethe satisfaction of knowing it. I do not want to say more than isnecessary--I am too much ashamed of having given way as I have done, andI dare say you understand me]
 ["Yes," said Emma, "I hope I do]
 ["How I could so long a time be fancying myself!..]
 [ cried Harriet,warmly. "It seems like madness! I can see nothing at all extraordinaryin him now.--I do not care whether I meet him or not--except that of thetwo I had rather not see him--and indeed I would go any distance roundto avoid him--but I do not envy his wife in the least; I neither admireher nor envy her, as I have done: she is very charming, I dare say, andall that, but I think her very ill-tempered and disagreeable--I shallnever forget her look the other night!--However, I assure you, MissWoodhouse, I wish her no evil.--No, let them be ever so happy together,it will not give me another moment's pang: and to convince you that Ihave been speaking truth, I am now going to destroy--what I ought tohave destroyed long ago--what I ought never to have kept--I know thatvery well (blushing as she spoke).--However, now I will destroy itall--and it is my particular wish to do it in your presence, that youmay see how rational I am grown. Cannot you guess what this parcelholds?" said she, with a conscious look]
 [Not the least in the world.--Did he ever give you any thing?""No--I cannot call them gifts; but they are things that I have valuedvery much]
 [She held the parcel towards her, and Emma read the words _Most__precious_ _treasures_ on the top. Her curiosity was greatly excited.Harriet unfolded the parcel, and she looked on with impatience. Withinabundance of silver paper was a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box,which Harriet opened: it was well lined with the softest cotton; but,excepting the cotton, Emma saw only a small piece of court-plaister]
 [Now," said Harriet, "you _must_ recollect]
 ["No, indeed I do not]
 ["Dear me! I should not have thought it possible you could forget whatpassed in this very room about court-plaister, one of the very lasttimes we ever met in it!--It was but a very few days before I had mysore throat--just before Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley came--I think thevery evening.--Do not you remember his cutting his finger with your newpenknife, and your recommending court-plaister?--But, as you had noneabout you, and knew I had, you desired me to supply him; and so I tookmine out and cut him a piece; but it was a great deal too large, and hecut it smaller, and kept playing some time with what was left, before hegave it back to me. And so then, in my nonsense, I could not help makinga treasure of it--so I put it by never to be used, and looked at it nowand then as a great treat]
 ["My dearest Harriet!" cried Emma, putting her hand before her face,and jumping up, "you make me more ashamed of myself than I can bear.Remember it? Aye, I remember it all now; all, except your saving thisrelic--I knew nothing of that till this moment--but the cutting thefinger, and my recommending court-plaister, and saying I had noneabout me!--Oh! my sins, my sins!--And I had plenty all the while in mypocket!--One of my senseless tricks!--I deserve to be under a continualblush all the rest of my life.--Well--(sitting down again)--go on--whatelse?""And had you really some at hand yourself? I am sure I never suspectedit, you did it so naturally]
 ["And so you actually put this piece of court-plaister by for his sake!"said Emma, recovering from her state of shame and feeling dividedbetween wonder and amusement. And secretly she added to herself, "Lordbless me! when should I ever have thought of putting by in cotton apiece of court-plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about! Inever was equal to this]
 ["Here," resumed Harriet, turning to her box again, "here is somethingstill more valuable, I mean that _has_ _been_ more valuable, becausethis is what did really once belong to him, which the court-plaisternever did]
 [Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure. It was the end of anold pencil,--the part without any lead]
 [This was really his," said Harriet.--"Do not you remember onemorning?--no, I dare say you do not. But one morning--I forget exactlythe day--but perhaps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before _that__evening_, he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket-book; it wasabout spruce-beer. Mr. Knightley had been telling him something aboutbrewing spruce-beer, and he wanted to put it down; but when he took outhis pencil, there was so little lead that he soon cut it all away, andit would not do, so you lent him another, and this was left upon thetable as good for nothing. But I kept my eye on it; and, as soon as Idared, caught it up, and never parted with it again from that moment]
 ["I do remember it," cried Emma; "I perfectly remember it.--Talkingabout spruce-beer.--Oh! yes--Mr. Knightley and I both saying weliked it, and Mr. Elton's seeming resolved to learn to like it too. Iperfectly remember it.--Stop; Mr. Knightley was standing just here, wasnot he? I have an idea he was standing just here]
 ["Ah! I do not know. I cannot recollect.--It is very odd, but I cannotrecollect.--Mr. Elton was sitting here, I remember, much about where Iam now]
 [--"Well, go on]
 ["Oh! that's all. I have nothing more to shew you, or to say--except thatI am now going to throw them both behind the fire, and I wish you to seeme do it]
 ["My poor dear Harriet! and have you actually found happiness intreasuring up these things?""Yes, simpleton as I was!--but I am quite ashamed of it now, and wish Icould forget as easily as I can burn them. It was very wrong of me, youknow, to keep any remembrances, after he was married. I knew it was--buthad not resolution enough to part with them]
 ["But, Harriet, is it necessary to burn the court-plaister?--I have nota word to say for the bit of old pencil, but the court-plaister might beuseful]
 ["I shall be happier to burn it," replied Harriet. "It has a disagreeablelook to me. I must get rid of every thing.--There it goes, and there isan end, thank Heaven! of Mr. Elton]
 ["And when," thought Emma, "will there be a beginning of Mr. Churchill?"She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning was alreadymade, and could not but hope that the gipsy, though she had _told_ nofortune, might be proved to have made Harriet's.--About a fortnightafter the alarm, they came to a sufficient explanation, and quiteundesignedly. Emma was not thinking of it at the moment, which made theinformation she received more valuable. She merely said, in the courseof some trivial chat, "Well, Harriet, whenever you marry I would adviseyou to do so and so"--and thought no more of it, till after a minute'ssilence she heard Harriet say in a very serious tone, "I shall nevermarry]
 [Emma then looked up, and immediately saw how it was; and after amoment's debate, as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not, replied,"Never marry!--This is a new resolution]
 ["It is one that I shall never change, however]
 [After another short hesitation, "I hope it does not proceed from--I hopeit is not in compliment to Mr. Elton?""Mr. Elton indeed!" cried Harriet indignantly.--"Oh! no"--and Emma couldjust catch the words, "so superior to Mr. Elton!"She then took a longer time for consideration. Should she proceed nofarther?--should she let it pass, and seem to suspect nothing?--PerhapsHarriet might think her cold or angry if she did; or perhaps if she weretotally silent, it might only drive Harriet into asking her to hear toomuch; and against any thing like such an unreserve as had been, suchan open and frequent discussion of hopes and chances, she was perfectlyresolved.--She believed it would be wiser for her to say and know atonce, all that she meant to say and know. Plain dealing was alwaysbest. She had previously determined how far she would proceed, on anyapplication of the sort; and it would be safer for both, to have thejudicious law of her own brain laid down with speed.--She was decided,and thus spoke--"Harriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning. Yourresolution, or rather your expectation of never marrying, results froman idea that the person whom you might prefer, would be too greatly yoursuperior in situation to think of you. Is not it so?""Oh! Miss Woodhouse, believe me I have not the presumption to suppose--Indeed I am not so mad.--But it is a pleasure to me to admire him at adistance--and to think of his infinite superiority to all the rest ofthe world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration, which are soproper, in me especially]
 ["I am not at all surprized at you, Harriet. The service he rendered youwas enough to warm your heart]
 ["Service! oh! it was such an inexpressible obligation!--The veryrecollection of it, and all that I felt at the time--when I saw himcoming--his noble look--and my wretchedness before. Such a change! Inone moment such a change! From perfect misery to perfect happiness!""It is very natural. It is natural, and it is honourable.--Yes,honourable, I think, to chuse so well and so gratefully.--But thatit will be a fortunate preference is more than I can promise. I do notadvise you to give way to it, Harriet. I do not by any means engagefor its being returned. Consider what you are about. Perhaps it will bewisest in you to check your feelings while you can: at any rate do notlet them carry you far, unless you are persuaded of his liking you. Beobservant of him. Let his behaviour be the guide of your sensations. Igive you this caution now, because I shall never speak to you again onthe subject. I am determined against all interference. Henceforward Iknow nothing of the matter. Let no name ever pass our lips. We were verywrong before; we will be cautious now.--He is your superior, no doubt,and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious nature; butyet, Harriet, more wonderful things have taken place, there have beenmatches of greater disparity. But take care of yourself. I would nothave you too sanguine; though, however it may end, be assured yourraising your thoughts to _him_, is a mark of good taste which I shallalways know how to value]
 [Harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude. Emma wasvery decided in thinking such an attachment no bad thing for her friend.Its tendency would be to raise and refine her mind--and it must besaving her from the danger of degradation.CHAPTER VIn this state of schemes, and hopes, and connivance, June opened uponHartfield. To Highbury in general it brought no material change. TheEltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings, and of the useto be made of their barouche-landau; and Jane Fairfax was still at hergrandmother's; and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland was againdelayed, and August, instead of Midsummer, fixed for it, she was likelyto remain there full two months longer, provided at least she were ableto defeat Mrs. Elton's activity in her service, and save herself frombeing hurried into a delightful situation against her will.Mr. Knightley, who, for some reason best known to himself, had certainlytaken an early dislike to Frank Churchill, was only growing to dislikehim more. He began to suspect him of some double dealing in his pursuitof Emma. That Emma was his object appeared indisputable. Every thingdeclared it; his own attentions, his father's hints, his mother-in-law'sguarded silence; it was all in unison; words, conduct, discretion, andindiscretion, told the same story. But while so many were devoting himto Emma, and Emma herself making him over to Harriet, Mr. Knightleybegan to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with Jane Fairfax. Hecould not understand it; but there were symptoms of intelligence betweenthem--he thought so at least--symptoms of admiration on his side, which,having once observed, he could not persuade himself to think entirelyvoid of meaning, however he might wish to escape any of Emma's errorsof imagination. _She_ was not present when the suspicion first arose.He was dining with the Randalls family, and Jane, at the Eltons'; and hehad seen a look, more than a single look, at Miss Fairfax, which, fromthe admirer of Miss Woodhouse, seemed somewhat out of place. When he wasagain in their company, he could not help remembering what he had seen;nor could he avoid observations which, unless it were like Cowper andhis fire at twilight,"Myself creating what I saw,"brought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a something of privateliking, of private understanding even, between Frank Churchill and Jane.He had walked up one day after dinner, as he very often did, to spendhis evening at Hartfield. Emma and Harriet were going to walk; he joinedthem; and, on returning, they fell in with a larger party, who, likethemselves, judged it wisest to take their exercise early, as theweather threatened rain; Mr. and Mrs. Weston and their son, Miss Batesand her niece, who had accidentally met. They all united; and, onreaching Hartfield gates, Emma, who knew it was exactly the sort ofvisiting that would be welcome to her father, pressed them all to go inand drink tea with him. The Randalls party agreed to it immediately; andafter a pretty long speech from Miss Bates, which few persons listenedto, she also found it possible to accept dear Miss Woodhouse's mostobliging invitation.As they were turning into the grounds, Mr. Perry passed by on horseback.The gentlemen spoke of his horse]
 [By the bye," said Frank Churchill to Mrs. Weston presently, "whatbecame of Mr. Perry's plan of setting up his carriage?"Mrs. Weston looked surprized, and said, "I did not know that he ever hadany such plan]
 ["Nay, I had it from you. You wrote me word of it three months ago]
 ["Me! impossible!""Indeed you did. I remember it perfectly. You mentioned it as whatwas certainly to be very soon. Mrs. Perry had told somebody, and wasextremely happy about it. It was owing to _her_ persuasion, as shethought his being out in bad weather did him a great deal of harm. Youmust remember it now?""Upon my word I never heard of it till this moment]
 ["Never! really, never!--Bless me! how could it be?--Then I must havedreamt it--but I was completely persuaded--Miss Smith, you walk as ifyou were tired. You will not be sorry to find yourself at home]
 ["What is this?--What is this?" cried Mr. Weston, "about Perry and acarriage? Is Perry going to set up his carriage, Frank? I am glad he canafford it. You had it from himself, had you?""No, sir," replied his son, laughing, "I seem to have had it fromnobody.--Very odd!--I really was persuaded of Mrs. Weston's havingmentioned it in one of her letters to Enscombe, many weeks ago, with allthese particulars--but as she declares she never heard a syllable ofit before, of course it must have been a dream. I am a great dreamer.I dream of every body at Highbury when I am away--and when I have gonethrough my particular friends, then I begin dreaming of Mr. and Mrs.Perry]
 ["It is odd though," observed his father, "that you should have had sucha regular connected dream about people whom it was not very likely youshould be thinking of at Enscombe. Perry's setting up his carriage! andhis wife's persuading him to it, out of care for his health--justwhat will happen, I have no doubt, some time or other; only a littlepremature. What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream!And at others, what a heap of absurdities it is! Well, Frank, your dreamcertainly shews that Highbury is in your thoughts when you are absent.Emma, you are a great dreamer, I think?"Emma was out of hearing. She had hurried on before her guests toprepare her father for their appearance, and was beyond the reach of Mr.Weston's hint]
 [Why, to own the truth," cried Miss Bates, who had been trying in vainto be heard the last two minutes, "if I must speak on this subject,there is no denying that Mr. Frank Churchill might have--I do not meanto say that he did not dream it--I am sure I have sometimes the oddestdreams in the world--but if I am questioned about it, I must acknowledgethat there was such an idea last spring; for Mrs. Perry herselfmentioned it to my mother, and the Coles knew of it as well asourselves--but it was quite a secret, known to nobody else, and onlythought of about three days. Mrs. Perry was very anxious that he shouldhave a carriage, and came to my mother in great spirits one morningbecause she thought she had prevailed. Jane, don't you remembergrandmama's telling us of it when we got home? I forget where wehad been walking to--very likely to Randalls; yes, I think it was toRandalls. Mrs. Perry was always particularly fond of my mother--indeedI do not know who is not--and she had mentioned it to her in confidence;she had no objection to her telling us, of course, but it was not to gobeyond: and, from that day to this, I never mentioned it to a soul thatI know of. At the same time, I will not positively answer for my havingnever dropt a hint, because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing beforeI am aware. I am a talker, you know; I am rather a talker; and now andthen I have let a thing escape me which I should not. I am not likeJane; I wish I were. I will answer for it _she_ never betrayed the leastthing in the world. Where is she?--Oh! just behind. Perfectly rememberMrs. Perry's coming.--Extraordinary dream, indeed!"They were entering the hall. Mr. Knightley's eyes had preceded MissBates's in a glance at Jane. From Frank Churchill's face, wherehe thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away, he hadinvoluntarily turned to hers; but she was indeed behind, and too busywith her shawl. Mr. Weston had walked in. The two other gentlemen waitedat the door to let her pass. Mr. Knightley suspected in FrankChurchill the determination of catching her eye--he seemed watching herintently--in vain, however, if it were so--Jane passed between theminto the hall, and looked at neither.There was no time for farther remark or explanation. The dream must beborne with, and Mr. Knightley must take his seat with the rest round thelarge modern circular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield, andwhich none but Emma could have had power to place there and persuade herfather to use, instead of the small-sized Pembroke, on which two of hisdaily meals had, for forty years been crowded. Tea passed pleasantly,and nobody seemed in a hurry to move]
 [Miss Woodhouse," said Frank Churchill, after examining a table behindhim, which he could reach as he sat, "have your nephews taken away theiralphabets--their box of letters? It used to stand here. Where is it?This is a sort of dull-looking evening, that ought to be treated ratheras winter than summer. We had great amusement with those letters onemorning. I want to puzzle you again]
 [Emma was pleased with the thought; and producing the box, the tablewas quickly scattered over with alphabets, which no one seemed so muchdisposed to employ as their two selves. They were rapidly forming wordsfor each other, or for any body else who would be puzzled. The quietnessof the game made it particularly eligible for Mr. Woodhouse, who hadoften been distressed by the more animated sort, which Mr. Weston hadoccasionally introduced, and who now sat happily occupied in lamenting,with tender melancholy, over the departure of the "poor little boys,"or in fondly pointing out, as he took up any stray letter near him, howbeautifully Emma had written it.Frank Churchill placed a word before Miss Fairfax. She gave a slightglance round the table, and applied herself to it. Frank was next toEmma, Jane opposite to them--and Mr. Knightley so placed as to see themall; and it was his object to see as much as he could, with as littleapparent observation. The word was discovered, and with a faint smilepushed away. If meant to be immediately mixed with the others, andburied from sight, she should have looked on the table instead oflooking just across, for it was not mixed; and Harriet, eager afterevery fresh word, and finding out none, directly took it up, and fell towork. She was sitting by Mr. Knightley, and turned to him for help. Theword was _blunder_; and as Harriet exultingly proclaimed it, there was ablush on Jane's cheek which gave it a meaning not otherwise ostensible.Mr. Knightley connected it with the dream; but how it could all be,was beyond his comprehension. How the delicacy, the discretion of hisfavourite could have been so lain asleep! He feared there must be somedecided involvement. Disingenuousness and double dealing seemed to meethim at every turn. These letters were but the vehicle for gallantry andtrick. It was a child's play, chosen to conceal a deeper game on FrankChurchill's part.With great indignation did he continue to observe him; with great alarmand distrust, to observe also his two blinded companions. He saw a shortword prepared for Emma, and given to her with a look sly and demure. Hesaw that Emma had soon made it out, and found it highly entertaining,though it was something which she judged it proper to appear to censure;for she said, "Nonsense! for shame!" He heard Frank Churchill next say,with a glance towards Jane, "I will give it to her--shall I?"--and asclearly heard Emma opposing it with eager laughing warmth. "No, no, youmust not; you shall not, indeed]
 [It was done however. This gallant young man, who seemed to love withoutfeeling, and to recommend himself without complaisance, directly handedover the word to Miss Fairfax, and with a particular degree of sedatecivility entreated her to study it. Mr. Knightley's excessive curiosityto know what this word might be, made him seize every possible momentfor darting his eye towards it, and it was not long before he saw itto be _Dixon_. Jane Fairfax's perception seemed to accompany his;her comprehension was certainly more equal to the covert meaning,the superior intelligence, of those five letters so arranged. She wasevidently displeased; looked up, and seeing herself watched, blushedmore deeply than he had ever perceived her, and saying only, "I did notknow that proper names were allowed," pushed away the letters with evenan angry spirit, and looked resolved to be engaged by no other wordthat could be offered. Her face was averted from those who had made theattack, and turned towards her aunt]
 [Aye, very true, my dear," cried the latter, though Jane had not spokena word--"I was just going to say the same thing. It is time for us to begoing indeed. The evening is closing in, and grandmama will be lookingfor us. My dear sir, you are too obliging. We really must wish you goodnight]
 [Jane's alertness in moving, proved her as ready as her aunt hadpreconceived. She was immediately up, and wanting to quit the table; butso many were also moving, that she could not get away; and Mr. Knightleythought he saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed towardsher, and resolutely swept away by her unexamined. She was afterwardslooking for her shawl--Frank Churchill was looking also--it was growingdusk, and the room was in confusion; and how they parted, Mr. Knightleycould not tell.He remained at Hartfield after all the rest, his thoughts full ofwhat he had seen; so full, that when the candles came to assist hisobservations, he must--yes, he certainly must, as a friend--an anxiousfriend--give Emma some hint, ask her some question. He could not see herin a situation of such danger, without trying to preserve her. It washis duty]
 [Pray, Emma," said he, "may I ask in what lay the great amusement, thepoignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax? I saw theword, and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining to theone, and so very distressing to the other]
 [Emma was extremely confused. She could not endure to give him the trueexplanation; for though her suspicions were by no means removed, she wasreally ashamed of having ever imparted them]
 [Oh!" she cried in evident embarrassment, "it all meant nothing; a merejoke among ourselves]
 ["The joke," he replied gravely, "seemed confined to you and Mr.Churchill]
 [He had hoped she would speak again, but she did not. She would ratherbusy herself about any thing than speak. He sat a little while indoubt. A variety of evils crossed his mind. Interference--fruitlessinterference. Emma's confusion, and the acknowledged intimacy, seemed todeclare her affection engaged. Yet he would speak. He owed it to her,to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwelcome interference,rather than her welfare; to encounter any thing, rather than theremembrance of neglect in such a cause]
 [My dear Emma," said he at last, with earnest kindness, "do youthink you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between thegentleman and lady we have been speaking of?""Between Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax? Oh! yes, perfectly.--Whydo you make a doubt of it?""Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her, orthat she admired him?""Never, never!" she cried with a most open eagerness--"Never, for thetwentieth part of a moment, did such an idea occur to me. And how couldit possibly come into your head?""I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of attachment betweenthem--certain expressive looks, which I did not believe meant to bepublic]
 ["Oh! you amuse me excessively. I am delighted to find that you canvouchsafe to let your imagination wander--but it will not do--very sorryto check you in your first essay--but indeed it will not do. There is noadmiration between them, I do assure you; and the appearances whichhave caught you, have arisen from some peculiar circumstances--feelingsrather of a totally different nature--it is impossible exactly toexplain:--there is a good deal of nonsense in it--but the part which iscapable of being communicated, which is sense, is, that they are as farfrom any attachment or admiration for one another, as any two beings inthe world can be. That is, I _presume_ it to be so on her side, and Ican _answer_ for its being so on his. I will answer for the gentleman'sindifference]
 [She spoke with a confidence which staggered, with a satisfactionwhich silenced, Mr. Knightley. She was in gay spirits, and would haveprolonged the conversation, wanting to hear the particulars of hissuspicions, every look described, and all the wheres and hows of acircumstance which highly entertained her: but his gaiety did not meethers. He found he could not be useful, and his feelings were too muchirritated for talking. That he might not be irritated into an absolutefever, by the fire which Mr. Woodhouse's tender habits required almostevery evening throughout the year, he soon afterwards took a hastyleave, and walked home to the coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey.CHAPTER VIAfter being long fed with hopes of a speedy visit from Mr. and Mrs.Suckling, the Highbury world were obliged to endure the mortificationof hearing that they could not possibly come till the autumn. No suchimportation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores atpresent. In the daily interchange of news, they must be again restrictedto the other topics with which for a while the Sucklings' coming hadbeen united, such as the last accounts of Mrs. Churchill, whose healthseemed every day to supply a different report, and the situation of Mrs.Weston, whose happiness it was to be hoped might eventually be as muchincreased by the arrival of a child, as that of all her neighbours wasby the approach of it.Mrs. Elton was very much disappointed. It was the delay of a great dealof pleasure and parade. Her introductions and recommendations must allwait, and every projected party be still only talked of. So she thoughtat first;--but a little consideration convinced her that every thingneed not be put off. Why should not they explore to Box Hill thoughthe Sucklings did not come? They could go there again with them in theautumn. It was settled that they should go to Box Hill. That there wasto be such a party had been long generally known: it had even given theidea of another. Emma had never been to Box Hill; she wished to see whatevery body found so well worth seeing, and she and Mr. Weston had agreedto chuse some fine morning and drive thither. Two or three more of thechosen only were to be admitted to join them, and it was to be done in aquiet, unpretending, elegant way, infinitely superior to the bustle andpreparation, the regular eating and drinking, and picnic parade of theEltons and the Sucklings.This was so very well understood between them, that Emma could not butfeel some surprise, and a little displeasure, on hearing from Mr. Westonthat he had been proposing to Mrs. Elton, as her brother and sister hadfailed her, that the two parties should unite, and go together; and thatas Mrs. Elton had very readily acceded to it, so it was to be, if shehad no objection. Now, as her objection was nothing but her very greatdislike of Mrs. Elton, of which Mr. Weston must already be perfectlyaware, it was not worth bringing forward again:--it could not be donewithout a reproof to him, which would be giving pain to his wife; andshe found herself therefore obliged to consent to an arrangement whichshe would have done a great deal to avoid; an arrangement which wouldprobably expose her even to the degradation of being said to be of Mrs.Elton's party! Every feeling was offended; and the forbearance of heroutward submission left a heavy arrear due of secret severity in herreflections on the unmanageable goodwill of Mr. Weston's temper]
 [I am glad you approve of what I have done," said he very comfortably]
 [But I thought you would. Such schemes as these are nothing withoutnumbers. One cannot have too large a party. A large party secures itsown amusement. And she is a good-natured woman after all. One could notleave her out]
 [Emma denied none of it aloud, and agreed to none of it in private.It was now the middle of June, and the weather fine; and Mrs. Eltonwas growing impatient to name the day, and settle with Mr. Weston as topigeon-pies and cold lamb, when a lame carriage-horse threw every thinginto sad uncertainty. It might be weeks, it might be only a few days,before the horse were useable; but no preparations could be venturedon, and it was all melancholy stagnation. Mrs. Elton's resources wereinadequate to such an attack]
 [Is not this most vexatious, Knightley?" she cried.--"And such weatherfor exploring!--These delays and disappointments are quite odious. Whatare we to do?--The year will wear away at this rate, and nothingdone. Before this time last year I assure you we had had a delightfulexploring party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston]
 ["You had better explore to Donwell," replied Mr. Knightley. "That maybe done without horses. Come, and eat my strawberries. They are ripeningfast]
 [If Mr. Knightley did not begin seriously, he was obliged to proceed so,for his proposal was caught at with delight; and the "Oh! I should likeit of all things," was not plainer in words than manner. Donwell wasfamous for its strawberry-beds, which seemed a plea for the invitation:but no plea was necessary; cabbage-beds would have been enough to temptthe lady, who only wanted to be going somewhere. She promised him againand again to come--much oftener than he doubted--and was extremelygratified by such a proof of intimacy, such a distinguishing complimentas she chose to consider it]
 [You may depend upon me," said she. "I certainly will come. Name yourday, and I will come. You will allow me to bring Jane Fairfax?""I cannot name a day," said he, "till I have spoken to some others whomI would wish to meet you]
 ["Oh! leave all that to me. Only give me a carte-blanche.--I am LadyPatroness, you know. It is my party. I will bring friends with me]
 ["I hope you will bring Elton," said he: "but I will not trouble you togive any other invitations]
 ["Oh! now you are looking very sly. But consider--you need not be afraidof delegating power to _me_. I am no young lady on her preferment.Married women, you know, may be safely authorised. It is my party. Leaveit all to me. I will invite your guests]
 ["No,"--he calmly replied,--"there is but one married woman in the worldwhom I can ever allow to invite what guests she pleases to Donwell, andthat one is--""--Mrs. Weston, I suppose," interrupted Mrs. Elton, rather mortified]
 [No--Mrs. Knightley;--and till she is in being, I will manage suchmatters myself]
 ["Ah! you are an odd creature!" she cried, satisfied to have no onepreferred to herself.--"You are a humourist, and may say what youlike. Quite a humourist. Well, I shall bring Jane with me--Jane and heraunt.--The rest I leave to you. I have no objections at all to meetingthe Hartfield family. Don't scruple. I know you are attached to them]
 ["You certainly will meet them if I can prevail; and I shall call on MissBates in my way home]
 ["That's quite unnecessary; I see Jane every day:--but as you like. Itis to be a morning scheme, you know, Knightley; quite a simple thing. Ishall wear a large bonnet, and bring one of my little baskets hangingon my arm. Here,--probably this basket with pink ribbon. Nothing can bemore simple, you see. And Jane will have such another. There is to beno form or parade--a sort of gipsy party. We are to walk aboutyour gardens, and gather the strawberries ourselves, and sit undertrees;--and whatever else you may like to provide, it is to be all outof doors--a table spread in the shade, you know. Every thing as naturaland simple as possible. Is not that your idea?""Not quite. My idea of the simple and the natural will be to havethe table spread in the dining-room. The nature and the simplicity ofgentlemen and ladies, with their servants and furniture, I think isbest observed by meals within doors. When you are tired of eatingstrawberries in the garden, there shall be cold meat in the house]
 ["Well--as you please; only don't have a great set out. And, by the bye,can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion?--Pray besincere, Knightley. If you wish me to talk to Mrs. Hodges, or to inspectanything--""I have not the least wish for it, I thank you]
 ["Well--but if any difficulties should arise, my housekeeper is extremelyclever]
 ["I will answer for it, that mine thinks herself full as clever, andwould spurn any body's assistance]
 ["I wish we had a donkey. The thing would be for us all to come ondonkeys, Jane, Miss Bates, and me--and my caro sposo walking by. Ireally must talk to him about purchasing a donkey. In a country lifeI conceive it to be a sort of necessary; for, let a woman have everso many resources, it is not possible for her to be always shut up athome;--and very long walks, you know--in summer there is dust, and inwinter there is dirt]
 ["You will not find either, between Donwell and Highbury. Donwell Lane isnever dusty, and now it is perfectly dry. Come on a donkey, however, ifyou prefer it. You can borrow Mrs. Cole's. I would wish every thing tobe as much to your taste as possible]
 ["That I am sure you would. Indeed I do you justice, my good friend.Under that peculiar sort of dry, blunt manner, I know you have thewarmest heart. As I tell Mr. E., you are a thorough humourist.--Yes,believe me, Knightley, I am fully sensible of your attention to me inthe whole of this scheme. You have hit upon the very thing to pleaseme]
 [Mr. Knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade. Hewished to persuade Mr. Woodhouse, as well as Emma, to join the party;and he knew that to have any of them sitting down out of doors toeat would inevitably make him ill. Mr. Woodhouse must not, under thespecious pretence of a morning drive, and an hour or two spent atDonwell, be tempted away to his misery.He was invited on good faith. No lurking horrors were to upbraid him forhis easy credulity. He did consent. He had not been at Donwell for twoyears. "Some very fine morning, he, and Emma, and Harriet, could govery well; and he could sit still with Mrs. Weston, while the dear girlswalked about the gardens. He did not suppose they could be damp now,in the middle of the day. He should like to see the old house againexceedingly, and should be very happy to meet Mr. and Mrs. Elton, andany other of his neighbours.--He could not see any objection at all tohis, and Emma's, and Harriet's going there some very fine morning. Hethought it very well done of Mr. Knightley to invite them--very kindand sensible--much cleverer than dining out.--He was not fond of diningout]
 [Mr. Knightley was fortunate in every body's most ready concurrence. Theinvitation was everywhere so well received, that it seemed as if, likeMrs. Elton, they were all taking the scheme as a particular complimentto themselves.--Emma and Harriet professed very high expectations ofpleasure from it; and Mr. Weston, unasked, promised to get Frank over tojoin them, if possible; a proof of approbation and gratitude which couldhave been dispensed with.--Mr. Knightley was then obliged to say thathe should be glad to see him; and Mr. Weston engaged to lose no time inwriting, and spare no arguments to induce him to come.In the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast, that the party toBox Hill was again under happy consideration; and at last Donwell wassettled for one day, and Box Hill for the next,--the weather appearingexactly right.Under a bright mid-day sun, at almost Midsummer, Mr. Woodhouse wassafely conveyed in his carriage, with one window down, to partake ofthis al-fresco party; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in theAbbey, especially prepared for him by a fire all the morning, he washappily placed, quite at his ease, ready to talk with pleasure of whathad been achieved, and advise every body to come and sit down, and notto heat themselves.--Mrs. Weston, who seemed to have walked there onpurpose to be tired, and sit all the time with him, remained, whenall the others were invited or persuaded out, his patient listener andsympathiser.It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey, that as soon as she wassatisfied of her father's comfort, she was glad to leave him, and lookaround her; eager to refresh and correct her memory with more particularobservation, more exact understanding of a house and grounds which mustever be so interesting to her and all her family.She felt all the honest pride and complacency which her alliance withthe present and future proprietor could fairly warrant, as she viewedthe respectable size and style of the building, its suitable, becoming,characteristic situation, low and sheltered--its ample gardensstretching down to meadows washed by a stream, of which the Abbey, withall the old neglect of prospect, had scarcely a sight--and its abundanceof timber in rows and avenues, which neither fashion nor extravagancehad rooted up.--The house was larger than Hartfield, and totally unlikeit, covering a good deal of ground, rambling and irregular, with manycomfortable, and one or two handsome rooms.--It was just what it oughtto be, and it looked what it was--and Emma felt an increasing respectfor it, as the residence of a family of such true gentility, untaintedin blood and understanding.--Some faults of temper John Knightley had;but Isabella had connected herself unexceptionably. She had given themneither men, nor names, nor places, that could raise a blush. These werepleasant feelings, and she walked about and indulged them till itwas necessary to do as the others did, and collect round thestrawberry-beds.--The whole party were assembled, excepting FrankChurchill, who was expected every moment from Richmond; and Mrs. Elton,in all her apparatus of happiness, her large bonnet and her basket,was very ready to lead the way in gathering, accepting, ortalking--strawberries, and only strawberries, could now be thought orspoken of.--"The best fruit in England--every body's favourite--alwayswholesome.--These the finest beds and finest sorts.--Delightful togather for one's self--the only way of really enjoying them.--Morningdecidedly the best time--never tired--every sort good--hautboyinfinitely superior--no comparison--the others hardly eatable--hautboysvery scarce--Chili preferred--white wood finest flavour of all--priceof strawberries in London--abundance about Bristol--MapleGrove--cultivation--beds when to be renewed--gardeners thinking exactlydifferent--no general rule--gardeners never to be put out of theirway--delicious fruit--only too rich to be eaten much of--inferiorto cherries--currants more refreshing--only objection to gatheringstrawberries the stooping--glaring sun--tired to death--could bear it nolonger--must go and sit in the shade]
 [Such, for half an hour, was the conversation--interrupted only once byMrs. Weston, who came out, in her solicitude after her son-in-law, toinquire if he were come--and she was a little uneasy.--She had somefears of his horse.Seats tolerably in the shade were found; and now Emma was obligedto overhear what Mrs. Elton and Jane Fairfax were talking of.--Asituation, a most desirable situation, was in question. Mrs. Elton hadreceived notice of it that morning, and was in raptures. It was notwith Mrs. Suckling, it was not with Mrs. Bragge, but in felicity andsplendour it fell short only of them: it was with a cousin of Mrs.Bragge, an acquaintance of Mrs. Suckling, a lady known at Maple Grove.Delightful, charming, superior, first circles, spheres, lines, ranks,every thing--and Mrs. Elton was wild to have the offer closed withimmediately.--On her side, all was warmth, energy, and triumph--and shepositively refused to take her friend's negative, though Miss Fairfaxcontinued to assure her that she would not at present engage in anything, repeating the same motives which she had been heard to urgebefore.--Still Mrs. Elton insisted on being authorised to write anacquiescence by the morrow's post.--How Jane could bear it at all, wasastonishing to Emma.--She did look vexed, she did speak pointedly--andat last, with a decision of action unusual to her, proposed aremoval.--"Should not they walk? Would not Mr. Knightley shew them thegardens--all the gardens?--She wished to see the whole extent]
 [--Thepertinacity of her friend seemed more than she could bear.It was hot; and after walking some time over the gardens in a scattered,dispersed way, scarcely any three together, they insensibly followed oneanother to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of limes, whichstretching beyond the garden at an equal distance from the river, seemedthe finish of the pleasure grounds.--It led to nothing; nothing but aview at the end over a low stone wall with high pillars, which seemedintended, in their erection, to give the appearance of an approach tothe house, which never had been there. Disputable, however, as might bethe taste of such a termination, it was in itself a charming walk, andthe view which closed it extremely pretty.--The considerable slope, atnearly the foot of which the Abbey stood, gradually acquired a steeperform beyond its grounds; and at half a mile distant was a bank ofconsiderable abruptness and grandeur, well clothed with wood;--and atthe bottom of this bank, favourably placed and sheltered, rose theAbbey Mill Farm, with meadows in front, and the river making a close andhandsome curve around it.It was a sweet view--sweet to the eye and the mind. English verdure,English culture, English comfort, seen under a sun bright, without beingoppressive.In this walk Emma and Mr. Weston found all the others assembled; andtowards this view she immediately perceived Mr. Knightley and Harrietdistinct from the rest, quietly leading the way. Mr. Knightley andHarriet!--It was an odd tete-a-tete; but she was glad to see it.--Therehad been a time when he would have scorned her as a companion, andturned from her with little ceremony. Now they seemed in pleasantconversation. There had been a time also when Emma would have been sorryto see Harriet in a spot so favourable for the Abbey Mill Farm; but nowshe feared it not. It might be safely viewed with all its appendages ofprosperity and beauty, its rich pastures, spreading flocks, orchard inblossom, and light column of smoke ascending.--She joined them at thewall, and found them more engaged in talking than in looking around. Hewas giving Harriet information as to modes of agriculture, etc. and Emmareceived a smile which seemed to say, "These are my own concerns. I havea right to talk on such subjects, without being suspected ofintroducing Robert Martin]
 [--She did not suspect him. It was too olda story.--Robert Martin had probably ceased to think of Harriet.--Theytook a few turns together along the walk.--The shade was mostrefreshing, and Emma found it the pleasantest part of the day.The next remove was to the house; they must all go in and eat;--and theywere all seated and busy, and still Frank Churchill did not come. Mrs.Weston looked, and looked in vain. His father would not own himselfuneasy, and laughed at her fears; but she could not be cured of wishingthat he would part with his black mare. He had expressed himself as tocoming, with more than common certainty. "His aunt was so much better,that he had not a doubt of getting over to them]
 [--Mrs. Churchill'sstate, however, as many were ready to remind her, was liable to suchsudden variation as might disappoint her nephew in the most reasonabledependence--and Mrs. Weston was at last persuaded to believe, or to say,that it must be by some attack of Mrs. Churchill that he wasprevented coming.--Emma looked at Harriet while the point was underconsideration; she behaved very well, and betrayed no emotion.The cold repast was over, and the party were to go out once more to seewhat had not yet been seen, the old Abbey fish-ponds; perhaps get as faras the clover, which was to be begun cutting on the morrow, or, atany rate, have the pleasure of being hot, and growing cool again.--Mr.Woodhouse, who had already taken his little round in the highest partof the gardens, where no damps from the river were imagined even by him,stirred no more; and his daughter resolved to remain with him, thatMrs. Weston might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise andvariety which her spirits seemed to need.Mr. Knightley had done all in his power for Mr. Woodhouse'sentertainment. Books of engravings, drawers of medals, cameos, corals,shells, and every other family collection within his cabinets, had beenprepared for his old friend, to while away the morning; and the kindnesshad perfectly answered. Mr. Woodhouse had been exceedingly well amused.Mrs. Weston had been shewing them all to him, and now he would shew themall to Emma;--fortunate in having no other resemblance to a child, thanin a total want of taste for what he saw, for he was slow, constant, andmethodical.--Before this second looking over was begun, however, Emmawalked into the hall for the sake of a few moments' free observation ofthe entrance and ground-plot of the house--and was hardly there, whenJane Fairfax appeared, coming quickly in from the garden, and with alook of escape.--Little expecting to meet Miss Woodhouse so soon, therewas a start at first; but Miss Woodhouse was the very person she was inquest of]
 [Will you be so kind," said she, "when I am missed, as to say that I amgone home?--I am going this moment.--My aunt is not aware how late itis, nor how long we have been absent--but I am sure we shall be wanted,and I am determined to go directly.--I have said nothing about it to anybody. It would only be giving trouble and distress. Some are gone to theponds, and some to the lime walk. Till they all come in I shall not bemissed; and when they do, will you have the goodness to say that I amgone?""Certainly, if you wish it;--but you are not going to walk to Highburyalone?""Yes--what should hurt me?--I walk fast. I shall be at home in twentyminutes]
 ["But it is too far, indeed it is, to be walking quite alone. Let myfather's servant go with you.--Let me order the carriage. It can beround in five minutes]
 ["Thank you, thank you--but on no account.--I would rather walk.--Andfor _me_ to be afraid of walking alone!--I, who may so soon have toguard others!"She spoke with great agitation; and Emma very feelingly replied, "Thatcan be no reason for your being exposed to danger now. I must order thecarriage. The heat even would be danger.--You are fatigued already]
 ["I am,"--she answered--"I am fatigued; but it is not the sort offatigue--quick walking will refresh me.--Miss Woodhouse, we all knowat times what it is to be wearied in spirits. Mine, I confess, areexhausted. The greatest kindness you can shew me, will be to let me havemy own way, and only say that I am gone when it is necessary]
 [Emma had not another word to oppose. She saw it all; and entering intoher feelings, promoted her quitting the house immediately, andwatched her safely off with the zeal of a friend. Her parting look wasgrateful--and her parting words, "Oh! Miss Woodhouse, the comfort ofbeing sometimes alone!"--seemed to burst from an overcharged heart, andto describe somewhat of the continual endurance to be practised by her,even towards some of those who loved her best]
 [Such a home, indeed! such an aunt!" said Emma, as she turned back intothe hall again. "I do pity you. And the more sensibility you betray oftheir just horrors, the more I shall like you]
 [Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour, and they had onlyaccomplished some views of St. Mark's Place, Venice, when FrankChurchill entered the room. Emma had not been thinking of him, she hadforgotten to think of him--but she was very glad to see him. Mrs. Westonwould be at ease. The black mare was blameless; _they_ were rightwho had named Mrs. Churchill as the cause. He had been detained bya temporary increase of illness in her; a nervous seizure, which hadlasted some hours--and he had quite given up every thought of coming,till very late;--and had he known how hot a ride he should have, andhow late, with all his hurry, he must be, he believed he should not havecome at all. The heat was excessive; he had never suffered any thinglike it--almost wished he had staid at home--nothing killed himlike heat--he could bear any degree of cold, etc., but heat wasintolerable--and he sat down, at the greatest possible distance from theslight remains of Mr. Woodhouse's fire, looking very deplorable]
 [You will soon be cooler, if you sit still," said Emma]
 [As soon as I am cooler I shall go back again. I could very ill bespared--but such a point had been made of my coming! You will all begoing soon I suppose; the whole party breaking up. I met _one_ as Icame--Madness in such weather!--absolute madness!"Emma listened, and looked, and soon perceived that Frank Churchill'sstate might be best defined by the expressive phrase of being out ofhumour. Some people were always cross when they were hot. Such might behis constitution; and as she knew that eating and drinking were oftenthe cure of such incidental complaints, she recommended his takingsome refreshment; he would find abundance of every thing in thedining-room--and she humanely pointed out the door]
 [No--he should not eat. He was not hungry; it would only make himhotter]
 [ In two minutes, however, he relented in his own favour; andmuttering something about spruce-beer, walked off. Emma returned all herattention to her father, saying in secret--"I am glad I have done being in love with him. I should not like a manwho is so soon discomposed by a hot morning. Harriet's sweet easy temperwill not mind it]
 [He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal, and cameback all the better--grown quite cool--and, with good manners, likehimself--able to draw a chair close to them, take an interest in theiremployment; and regret, in a reasonable way, that he should be so late.He was not in his best spirits, but seemed trying to improve them; and,at last, made himself talk nonsense very agreeably. They were lookingover views in Swisserland]
 [As soon as my aunt gets well, I shall go abroad," said he. "I shallnever be easy till I have seen some of these places. You will have mysketches, some time or other, to look at--or my tour to read--or mypoem. I shall do something to expose myself]
 ["That may be--but not by sketches in Swisserland. You will never go toSwisserland. Your uncle and aunt will never allow you to leave England]
 ["They may be induced to go too. A warm climate may be prescribed forher. I have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad. Iassure you I have. I feel a strong persuasion, this morning, that Ishall soon be abroad. I ought to travel. I am tired of doing nothing. Iwant a change. I am serious, Miss Woodhouse, whatever your penetratingeyes may fancy--I am sick of England--and would leave it to-morrow, ifI could]
 ["You are sick of prosperity and indulgence. Cannot you invent a fewhardships for yourself, and be contented to stay?""_I_ sick of prosperity and indulgence! You are quite mistaken. I donot look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged. I am thwartedin every thing material. I do not consider myself at all a fortunateperson]
 ["You are not quite so miserable, though, as when you first came. Go andeat and drink a little more, and you will do very well. Another slice ofcold meat, another draught of Madeira and water, will make you nearly ona par with the rest of us]
 ["No--I shall not stir. I shall sit by you. You are my best cure]
 ["We are going to Box Hill to-morrow;--you will join us. It is notSwisserland, but it will be something for a young man so much in want ofa change. You will stay, and go with us?""No, certainly not; I shall go home in the cool of the evening]
 ["But you may come again in the cool of to-morrow morning]
 ["No--It will not be worth while. If I come, I shall be cross]
 ["Then pray stay at Richmond]
 ["But if I do, I shall be crosser still. I can never bear to think of youall there without me]
 ["These are difficulties which you must settle for yourself. Chuse yourown degree of crossness. I shall press you no more]
 [The rest of the party were now returning, and all were soon collected.With some there was great joy at the sight of Frank Churchill; otherstook it very composedly; but there was a very general distress anddisturbance on Miss Fairfax's disappearance being explained. That it wastime for every body to go, concluded the subject; and with a short finalarrangement for the next day's scheme, they parted. Frank Churchill'slittle inclination to exclude himself increased so much, that his lastwords to Emma were,"Well;--if _you_ wish me to stay and join the party, I will]
 [She smiled her acceptance; and nothing less than a summons from Richmondwas to take him back before the following evening.CHAPTER VIIThey had a very fine day for Box Hill; and all the other outwardcircumstances of arrangement, accommodation, and punctuality, were infavour of a pleasant party. Mr. Weston directed the whole, officiatingsafely between Hartfield and the Vicarage, and every body was in goodtime. Emma and Harriet went together; Miss Bates and her niece, withthe Eltons; the gentlemen on horseback. Mrs. Weston remained with Mr.Woodhouse. Nothing was wanting but to be happy when they got there.Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment, and every bodyhad a burst of admiration on first arriving; but in the general amountof the day there was deficiency. There was a languor, a want of spirits,a want of union, which could not be got over. They separated too muchinto parties. The Eltons walked together; Mr. Knightley took charge ofMiss Bates and Jane; and Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank Churchill.And Mr. Weston tried, in vain, to make them harmonise better. It seemedat first an accidental division, but it never materially varied. Mr. andMrs. Elton, indeed, shewed no unwillingness to mix, and be as agreeableas they could; but during the two whole hours that were spent on thehill, there seemed a principle of separation, between the other parties,too strong for any fine prospects, or any cold collation, or anycheerful Mr. Weston, to remove.At first it was downright dulness to Emma. She had never seen FrankChurchill so silent and stupid. He said nothing worth hearing--lookedwithout seeing--admired without intelligence--listened without knowingwhat she said. While he was so dull, it was no wonder that Harrietshould be dull likewise; and they were both insufferable.When they all sat down it was better; to her taste a great deal better,for Frank Churchill grew talkative and gay, making her his first object.Every distinguishing attention that could be paid, was paid to her.To amuse her, and be agreeable in her eyes, seemed all that he caredfor--and Emma, glad to be enlivened, not sorry to be flattered, was gayand easy too, and gave him all the friendly encouragement, the admissionto be gallant, which she had ever given in the first and most animatingperiod of their acquaintance; but which now, in her own estimation,meant nothing, though in the judgment of most people looking on it musthave had such an appearance as no English word but flirtation could verywell describe. "Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse flirted togetherexcessively]
 [ They were laying themselves open to that very phrase--andto having it sent off in a letter to Maple Grove by one lady, toIreland by another. Not that Emma was gay and thoughtless from anyreal felicity; it was rather because she felt less happy than she hadexpected. She laughed because she was disappointed; and though she likedhim for his attentions, and thought them all, whether in friendship,admiration, or playfulness, extremely judicious, they were not winningback her heart. She still intended him for her friend]
 [How much I am obliged to you," said he, "for telling me to cometo-day!--If it had not been for you, I should certainly have lost allthe happiness of this party. I had quite determined to go away again]
 ["Yes, you were very cross; and I do not know what about, except that youwere too late for the best strawberries. I was a kinder friend than youdeserved. But you were humble. You begged hard to be commanded to come]
 ["Don't say I was cross. I was fatigued. The heat overcame me]
 ["It is hotter to-day]
 ["Not to my feelings. I am perfectly comfortable to-day]
 ["You are comfortable because you are under command]
 ["Your command?--Yes]
 ["Perhaps I intended you to say so, but I meant self-command. You had,somehow or other, broken bounds yesterday, and run away from your ownmanagement; but to-day you are got back again--and as I cannot be alwayswith you, it is best to believe your temper under your own commandrather than mine]
 ["It comes to the same thing. I can have no self-command without amotive. You order me, whether you speak or not. And you can be alwayswith me. You are always with me]
 ["Dating from three o'clock yesterday. My perpetual influence could notbegin earlier, or you would not have been so much out of humour before]
 ["Three o'clock yesterday! That is your date. I thought I had seen youfirst in February]
 ["Your gallantry is really unanswerable. But (lowering her voice)--nobodyspeaks except ourselves, and it is rather too much to be talkingnonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people]
 ["I say nothing of which I am ashamed," replied he, with livelyimpudence. "I saw you first in February. Let every body on the Hillhear me if they can. Let my accents swell to Mickleham on one side,and Dorking on the other. I saw you first in February]
 [ And thenwhispering--"Our companions are excessively stupid. What shall we doto rouse them? Any nonsense will serve. They _shall_ talk. Ladiesand gentlemen, I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse (who, wherever she is,presides) to say, that she desires to know what you are all thinkingof?"Some laughed, and answered good-humouredly. Miss Bates said a greatdeal; Mrs. Elton swelled at the idea of Miss Woodhouse's presiding; Mr.Knightley's answer was the most distinct]
 [Is Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we are allthinking of?""Oh! no, no"--cried Emma, laughing as carelessly as she could--"Upon noaccount in the world. It is the very last thing I would stand the bruntof just now. Let me hear any thing rather than what you are all thinkingof. I will not say quite all. There are one or two, perhaps, (glancingat Mr. Weston and Harriet,) whose thoughts I might not be afraid ofknowing]
 ["It is a sort of thing," cried Mrs. Elton emphatically, "which _I_should not have thought myself privileged to inquire into. Though,perhaps, as the _Chaperon_ of the party--_I_ never was in anycircle--exploring parties--young ladies--married women--"Her mutterings were chiefly to her husband; and he murmured, in reply,"Very true, my love, very true. Exactly so, indeed--quite unheardof--but some ladies say any thing. Better pass it off as a joke. Everybody knows what is due to _you_]
 ["It will not do," whispered Frank to Emma; "they are most of themaffronted. I will attack them with more address. Ladies and gentlemen--Iam ordered by Miss Woodhouse to say, that she waives her right ofknowing exactly what you may all be thinking of, and only requiressomething very entertaining from each of you, in a general way. Hereare seven of you, besides myself, (who, she is pleased to say, am veryentertaining already,) and she only demands from each of you either onething very clever, be it prose or verse, original or repeated--or twothings moderately clever--or three things very dull indeed, and sheengages to laugh heartily at them all]
 ["Oh! very well," exclaimed Miss Bates, "then I need not be uneasy]
 [Three things very dull indeed]
 [ That will just do for me, you know. Ishall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open my mouth,shan't I? (looking round with the most good-humoured dependence on everybody's assent)--Do not you all think I shall?"Emma could not resist]
 [Ah! ma'am, but there may be a difficulty. Pardon me--but you will belimited as to number--only three at once]
 [Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner, did notimmediately catch her meaning; but, when it burst on her, it could notanger, though a slight blush shewed that it could pain her]
 [Ah!--well--to be sure. Yes, I see what she means, (turning to Mr.Knightley,) and I will try to hold my tongue. I must make myself verydisagreeable, or she would not have said such a thing to an old friend]
 ["I like your plan," cried Mr. Weston. "Agreed, agreed. I will do mybest. I am making a conundrum. How will a conundrum reckon?""Low, I am afraid, sir, very low," answered his son;--"but we shall beindulgent--especially to any one who leads the way]
 ["No, no," said Emma, "it will not reckon low. A conundrum of Mr.Weston's shall clear him and his next neighbour. Come, sir, pray let mehear it]
 ["I doubt its being very clever myself," said Mr. Weston. "It is too mucha matter of fact, but here it is.--What two letters of the alphabet arethere, that express perfection?""What two letters!--express perfection! I am sure I do not know]
 ["Ah! you will never guess. You, (to Emma), I am certain, will neverguess.--I will tell you.--M. and A.--Em-ma.--Do you understand?"Understanding and gratification came together. It might be a veryindifferent piece of wit, but Emma found a great deal to laugh at andenjoy in it--and so did Frank and Harriet.--It did not seem to touchthe rest of the party equally; some looked very stupid about it, and Mr.Knightley gravely said,"This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted, and Mr. Westonhas done very well for himself; but he must have knocked up every bodyelse. _Perfection_ should not have come quite so soon]
 ["Oh! for myself, I protest I must be excused," said Mrs. Elton; "_I_really cannot attempt--I am not at all fond of the sort of thing. I hadan acrostic once sent to me upon my own name, which I was not at allpleased with. I knew who it came from. An abominable puppy!--You knowwho I mean (nodding to her husband). These kind of things are verywell at Christmas, when one is sitting round the fire; but quite out ofplace, in my opinion, when one is exploring about the country in summer.Miss Woodhouse must excuse me. I am not one of those who have wittythings at every body's service. I do not pretend to be a wit. I have agreat deal of vivacity in my own way, but I really must be allowed tojudge when to speak and when to hold my tongue. Pass us, if you please,Mr. Churchill. Pass Mr. E., Knightley, Jane, and myself. We have nothingclever to say--not one of us]
 [Yes, yes, pray pass _me_," added her husband, with a sort of sneeringconsciousness; "_I_ have nothing to say that can entertain MissWoodhouse, or any other young lady. An old married man--quite good fornothing. Shall we walk, Augusta?""With all my heart. I am really tired of exploring so long on one spot.Come, Jane, take my other arm]
 [Jane declined it, however, and the husband and wife walked off]
 [Happy couple!" said Frank Churchill, as soon as they were out ofhearing:--"How well they suit one another!--Very lucky--marrying as theydid, upon an acquaintance formed only in a public place!--They only kneweach other, I think, a few weeks in Bath! Peculiarly lucky!--for as toany real knowledge of a person's disposition that Bath, or any publicplace, can give--it is all nothing; there can be no knowledge. It isonly by seeing women in their own homes, among their own set, just asthey always are, that you can form any just judgment. Short of that, itis all guess and luck--and will generally be ill-luck. How many a manhas committed himself on a short acquaintance, and rued it all the restof his life!"Miss Fairfax, who had seldom spoken before, except among her ownconfederates, spoke now]
 [Such things do occur, undoubtedly]
 [--She was stopped by a cough. FrankChurchill turned towards her to listen]
 [You were speaking," said he, gravely. She recovered her voice]
 [I was only going to observe, that though such unfortunate circumstancesdo sometimes occur both to men and women, I cannot imagine them to bevery frequent. A hasty and imprudent attachment may arise--but there isgenerally time to recover from it afterwards. I would be understood tomean, that it can be only weak, irresolute characters, (whose happinessmust be always at the mercy of chance,) who will suffer an unfortunateacquaintance to be an inconvenience, an oppression for ever]
 [He made no answer; merely looked, and bowed in submission; and soonafterwards said, in a lively tone,"Well, I have so little confidence in my own judgment, that whenever Imarry, I hope some body will chuse my wife for me. Will you? (turning toEmma.) Will you chuse a wife for me?--I am sure I should like any bodyfixed on by you. You provide for the family, you know, (with a smile athis father). Find some body for me. I am in no hurry. Adopt her, educateher]
 ["And make her like myself]
 ["By all means, if you can]
 ["Very well. I undertake the commission. You shall have a charming wife]
 ["She must be very lively, and have hazle eyes. I care for nothing else.I shall go abroad for a couple of years--and when I return, I shall cometo you for my wife. Remember]
 [Emma was in no danger of forgetting. It was a commission to touch everyfavourite feeling. Would not Harriet be the very creature described?Hazle eyes excepted, two years more might make her all that he wished.He might even have Harriet in his thoughts at the moment; who could say?Referring the education to her seemed to imply it]
 [Now, ma'am," said Jane to her aunt, "shall we join Mrs. Elton?""If you please, my dear. With all my heart. I am quite ready. I wasready to have gone with her, but this will do just as well. We shallsoon overtake her. There she is--no, that's somebody else. That's oneof the ladies in the Irish car party, not at all like her.--Well, Ideclare--"They walked off, followed in half a minute by Mr. Knightley. Mr. Weston,his son, Emma, and Harriet, only remained; and the young man's spiritsnow rose to a pitch almost unpleasant. Even Emma grew tired at last offlattery and merriment, and wished herself rather walking quietly aboutwith any of the others, or sitting almost alone, and quite unattendedto, in tranquil observation of the beautiful views beneath her. Theappearance of the servants looking out for them to give notice of thecarriages was a joyful sight; and even the bustle of collecting andpreparing to depart, and the solicitude of Mrs. Elton to have _her_carriage first, were gladly endured, in the prospect of the quiet drivehome which was to close the very questionable enjoyments of this day ofpleasure. Such another scheme, composed of so many ill-assorted people,she hoped never to be betrayed into again.While waiting for the carriage, she found Mr. Knightley by her side. Helooked around, as if to see that no one were near, and then said,"Emma, I must once more speak to you as I have been used to do: aprivilege rather endured than allowed, perhaps, but I must still use it.I cannot see you acting wrong, without a remonstrance. How could you beso unfeeling to Miss Bates? How could you be so insolent in your wit toa woman of her character, age, and situation?--Emma, I had not thoughtit possible]
 [Emma recollected, blushed, was sorry, but tried to laugh it off]
 [Nay, how could I help saying what I did?--Nobody could have helped it.It was not so very bad. I dare say she did not understand me]
 ["I assure you she did. She felt your full meaning. She has talked ofit since. I wish you could have heard how she talked of it--with whatcandour and generosity. I wish you could have heard her honouring yourforbearance, in being able to pay her such attentions, as she was forever receiving from yourself and your father, when her society must beso irksome]
 ["Oh!" cried Emma, "I know there is not a better creature in the world:but you must allow, that what is good and what is ridiculous are mostunfortunately blended in her]
 ["They are blended," said he, "I acknowledge; and, were she prosperous,I could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculous overthe good. Were she a woman of fortune, I would leave every harmlessabsurdity to take its chance, I would not quarrel with you for anyliberties of manner. Were she your equal in situation--but, Emma,consider how far this is from being the case. She is poor; she has sunkfrom the comforts she was born to; and, if she live to old age, mustprobably sink more. Her situation should secure your compassion. It wasbadly done, indeed! You, whom she had known from an infant, whom she hadseen grow up from a period when her notice was an honour, to have younow, in thoughtless spirits, and the pride of the moment, laugh at her,humble her--and before her niece, too--and before others, many of whom(certainly _some_,) would be entirely guided by _your_ treatmentof her.--This is not pleasant to you, Emma--and it is very far frompleasant to me; but I must, I will,--I will tell you truths while I can;satisfied with proving myself your friend by very faithful counsel, andtrusting that you will some time or other do me greater justice than youcan do now]
 [While they talked, they were advancing towards the carriage; it wasready; and, before she could speak again, he had handed her in. He hadmisinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face averted, and hertongue motionless. They were combined only of anger against herself,mortification, and deep concern. She had not been able to speak; and, onentering the carriage, sunk back for a moment overcome--then reproachingherself for having taken no leave, making no acknowledgment, parting inapparent sullenness, she looked out with voice and hand eager to shew adifference; but it was just too late. He had turned away, and the horseswere in motion. She continued to look back, but in vain; and soon, withwhat appeared unusual speed, they were half way down the hill, andevery thing left far behind. She was vexed beyond what could have beenexpressed--almost beyond what she could conceal. Never had she felt soagitated, mortified, grieved, at any circumstance in her life. She wasmost forcibly struck. The truth of this representation there was nodenying. She felt it at her heart. How could she have been so brutal,so cruel to Miss Bates! How could she have exposed herself to such illopinion in any one she valued! And how suffer him to leave her withoutsaying one word of gratitude, of concurrence, of common kindness!Time did not compose her. As she reflected more, she seemed but to feelit more. She never had been so depressed. Happily it was not necessaryto speak. There was only Harriet, who seemed not in spirits herself,fagged, and very willing to be silent; and Emma felt the tears runningdown her cheeks almost all the way home, without being at any trouble tocheck them, extraordinary as they were.CHAPTER VIIIThe wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was in Emma's thoughts all theevening. How it might be considered by the rest of the party, she couldnot tell. They, in their different homes, and their different ways,might be looking back on it with pleasure; but in her view it wasa morning more completely misspent, more totally bare of rationalsatisfaction at the time, and more to be abhorred in recollection, thanany she had ever passed. A whole evening of back-gammon with her father,was felicity to it. _There_, indeed, lay real pleasure, for there shewas giving up the sweetest hours of the twenty-four to his comfort; andfeeling that, unmerited as might be the degree of his fond affection andconfiding esteem, she could not, in her general conduct, be open to anysevere reproach. As a daughter, she hoped she was not without a heart.She hoped no one could have said to her, "How could you be so unfeelingto your father?--I must, I will tell you truths while I can]
 [ MissBates should never again--no, never! If attention, in future, could doaway the past, she might hope to be forgiven. She had been often remiss,her conscience told her so; remiss, perhaps, more in thought than fact;scornful, ungracious. But it should be so no more. In the warmth of truecontrition, she would call upon her the very next morning, and it shouldbe the beginning, on her side, of a regular, equal, kindly intercourse.She was just as determined when the morrow came, and went early, thatnothing might prevent her. It was not unlikely, she thought, that shemight see Mr. Knightley in her way; or, perhaps, he might come inwhile she were paying her visit. She had no objection. She would not beashamed of the appearance of the penitence, so justly and truly hers.Her eyes were towards Donwell as she walked, but she saw him not]
 [The ladies were all at home]
 [ She had never rejoiced at the soundbefore, nor ever before entered the passage, nor walked up the stairs,with any wish of giving pleasure, but in conferring obligation, or ofderiving it, except in subsequent ridicule.There was a bustle on her approach; a good deal of moving and talking.She heard Miss Bates's voice, something was to be done in a hurry; themaid looked frightened and awkward; hoped she would be pleased to wait amoment, and then ushered her in too soon. The aunt and niece seemed bothescaping into the adjoining room. Jane she had a distinct glimpse of,looking extremely ill; and, before the door had shut them out, she heardMiss Bates saying, "Well, my dear, I shall _say_ you are laid down uponthe bed, and I am sure you are ill enough]
 [Poor old Mrs. Bates, civil and humble as usual, looked as if she did notquite understand what was going on]
 [I am afraid Jane is not very well," said she, "but I do not know; they_tell_ me she is well. I dare say my daughter will be here presently,Miss Woodhouse. I hope you find a chair. I wish Hetty had not gone. I amvery little able--Have you a chair, ma'am? Do you sit where you like? Iam sure she will be here presently]
 [Emma seriously hoped she would. She had a moment's fear of Miss Bateskeeping away from her. But Miss Bates soon came--"Very happy andobliged"--but Emma's conscience told her that there was not the samecheerful volubility as before--less ease of look and manner. A veryfriendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax, she hoped, might lead the way to areturn of old feelings. The touch seemed immediate]
 [Ah! Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are!--I suppose you have heard--andare come to give us joy. This does not seem much like joy, indeed, inme--(twinkling away a tear or two)--but it will be very trying for usto part with her, after having had her so long, and she has a dreadfulheadache just now, writing all the morning:--such long letters, youknow, to be written to Colonel Campbell, and Mrs. Dixon. 'My dear,' saidI, 'you will blind yourself'--for tears were in her eyes perpetually.One cannot wonder, one cannot wonder. It is a great change; and thoughshe is amazingly fortunate--such a situation, I suppose, as noyoung woman before ever met with on first going out--do not think usungrateful, Miss Woodhouse, for such surprising good fortune--(againdispersing her tears)--but, poor dear soul! if you were to see what aheadache she has. When one is in great pain, you know one cannot feelany blessing quite as it may deserve. She is as low as possible. Tolook at her, nobody would think how delighted and happy she is to havesecured such a situation. You will excuse her not coming to you--she isnot able--she is gone into her own room--I want her to lie down upon thebed. 'My dear,' said I, 'I shall say you are laid down upon the bed:'but, however, she is not; she is walking about the room. But, now thatshe has written her letters, she says she shall soon be well. She willbe extremely sorry to miss seeing you, Miss Woodhouse, but yourkindness will excuse her. You were kept waiting at the door--I was quiteashamed--but somehow there was a little bustle--for it so happened thatwe had not heard the knock, and till you were on the stairs, we did notknow any body was coming. 'It is only Mrs. Cole,' said I, 'depend uponit. Nobody else would come so early]
 [ 'Well,' said she, 'it must beborne some time or other, and it may as well be now]
 [ But then Pattycame in, and said it was you. 'Oh!' said I, 'it is Miss Woodhouse: I amsure you will like to see her]
 [--'I can see nobody,' said she; andup she got, and would go away; and that was what made us keep youwaiting--and extremely sorry and ashamed we were. 'If you must go, mydear,' said I, 'you must, and I will say you are laid down upon thebed]
 ["Emma was most sincerely interested. Her heart had been long growingkinder towards Jane; and this picture of her present sufferings actedas a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion, and left her nothing butpity; and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle sensations ofthe past, obliged her to admit that Jane might very naturally resolve onseeing Mrs. Cole or any other steady friend, when she might not bearto see herself. She spoke as she felt, with earnest regret andsolicitude--sincerely wishing that the circumstances which she collectedfrom Miss Bates to be now actually determined on, might be as much forMiss Fairfax's advantage and comfort as possible. "It must be a severetrial to them all. She had understood it was to be delayed till ColonelCampbell's return]
 ["So very kind!" replied Miss Bates. "But you are always kind]
 [There was no bearing such an "always;" and to break through her dreadfulgratitude, Emma made the direct inquiry of--"Where--may I ask?--is Miss Fairfax going?""To a Mrs. Smallridge--charming woman--most superior--to have the chargeof her three little girls--delightful children. Impossible that anysituation could be more replete with comfort; if we except, perhaps,Mrs. Suckling's own family, and Mrs. Bragge's; but Mrs. Smallridge isintimate with both, and in the very same neighbourhood:--lives only fourmiles from Maple Grove. Jane will be only four miles from Maple Grove]
 ["Mrs. Elton, I suppose, has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes--""Yes, our good Mrs. Elton. The most indefatigable, true friend. Shewould not take a denial. She would not let Jane say, 'No;' for when Janefirst heard of it, (it was the day before yesterday, the very morningwe were at Donwell,) when Jane first heard of it, she was quite decidedagainst accepting the offer, and for the reasons you mention; exactlyas you say, she had made up her mind to close with nothing till ColonelCampbell's return, and nothing should induce her to enter into anyengagement at present--and so she told Mrs. Elton over and overagain--and I am sure I had no more idea that she would change hermind!--but that good Mrs. Elton, whose judgment never fails her, sawfarther than I did. It is not every body that would have stood out insuch a kind way as she did, and refuse to take Jane's answer; but shepositively declared she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday, asJane wished her; she would wait--and, sure enough, yesterday evening itwas all settled that Jane should go. Quite a surprize to me! I had notthe least idea!--Jane took Mrs. Elton aside, and told her at once, thatupon thinking over the advantages of Mrs. Smallridge's situation, shehad come to the resolution of accepting it.--I did not know a word of ittill it was all settled]
 ["You spent the evening with Mrs. Elton?""Yes, all of us; Mrs. Elton would have us come. It was settled so, uponthe hill, while we were walking about with Mr. Knightley. 'You _must__all_ spend your evening with us,' said she--'I positively must have you_all_ come]
 [""Mr. Knightley was there too, was he?""No, not Mr. Knightley; he declined it from the first; and though Ithought he would come, because Mrs. Elton declared she would not let himoff, he did not;--but my mother, and Jane, and I, were all there, anda very agreeable evening we had. Such kind friends, you know, MissWoodhouse, one must always find agreeable, though every body seemedrather fagged after the morning's party. Even pleasure, you know, isfatiguing--and I cannot say that any of them seemed very much to haveenjoyed it. However, _I_ shall always think it a very pleasant party,and feel extremely obliged to the kind friends who included me in it]
 ["Miss Fairfax, I suppose, though you were not aware of it, had beenmaking up her mind the whole day?""I dare say she had]
 ["Whenever the time may come, it must be unwelcome to her and all herfriends--but I hope her engagement will have every alleviation that ispossible--I mean, as to the character and manners of the family]
 ["Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse. Yes, indeed, there is every thingin the world that can make her happy in it. Except the Sucklings andBragges, there is not such another nursery establishment, so liberaland elegant, in all Mrs. Elton's acquaintance. Mrs. Smallridge, a mostdelightful woman!--A style of living almost equal to Maple Grove--and asto the children, except the little Sucklings and little Bragges, thereare not such elegant sweet children anywhere. Jane will be treated withsuch regard and kindness!--It will be nothing but pleasure, a life ofpleasure.--And her salary!--I really cannot venture to name her salaryto you, Miss Woodhouse. Even you, used as you are to great sums, wouldhardly believe that so much could be given to a young person like Jane]
 ["Ah! madam," cried Emma, "if other children are at all like what Iremember to have been myself, I should think five times the amount ofwhat I have ever yet heard named as a salary on such occasions, dearlyearned]
 ["You are so noble in your ideas!""And when is Miss Fairfax to leave you?""Very soon, very soon, indeed; that's the worst of it. Within afortnight. Mrs. Smallridge is in a great hurry. My poor mother does notknow how to bear it. So then, I try to put it out of her thoughts, andsay, Come ma'am, do not let us think about it any more]
 ["Her friends must all be sorry to lose her; and will not Colonel andMrs. Campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herself before theirreturn?""Yes; Jane says she is sure they will; but yet, this is such a situationas she cannot feel herself justified in declining. I was so astonishedwhen she first told me what she had been saying to Mrs. Elton, and whenMrs. Elton at the same moment came congratulating me upon it! It wasbefore tea--stay--no, it could not be before tea, because we werejust going to cards--and yet it was before tea, because I rememberthinking--Oh! no, now I recollect, now I have it; something happenedbefore tea, but not that. Mr. Elton was called out of the room beforetea, old John Abdy's son wanted to speak with him. Poor old John, Ihave a great regard for him; he was clerk to my poor father twenty-sevenyears; and now, poor old man, he is bed-ridden, and very poorly with therheumatic gout in his joints--I must go and see him to-day; and so willJane, I am sure, if she gets out at all. And poor John's son came totalk to Mr. Elton about relief from the parish; he is very well to dohimself, you know, being head man at the Crown, ostler, and every thingof that sort, but still he cannot keep his father without some help;and so, when Mr. Elton came back, he told us what John ostler had beentelling him, and then it came out about the chaise having been sent toRandalls to take Mr. Frank Churchill to Richmond. That was what happenedbefore tea. It was after tea that Jane spoke to Mrs. Elton]
 [Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how perfectly new thiscircumstance was to her; but as without supposing it possible that shecould be ignorant of any of the particulars of Mr. Frank Churchill'sgoing, she proceeded to give them all, it was of no consequence.What Mr. Elton had learned from the ostler on the subject, being theaccumulation of the ostler's own knowledge, and the knowledge of theservants at Randalls, was, that a messenger had come over from Richmondsoon after the return of the party from Box Hill--which messenger,however, had been no more than was expected; and that Mr. Churchill hadsent his nephew a few lines, containing, upon the whole, a tolerableaccount of Mrs. Churchill, and only wishing him not to delay comingback beyond the next morning early; but that Mr. Frank Churchill havingresolved to go home directly, without waiting at all, and his horseseeming to have got a cold, Tom had been sent off immediately for theCrown chaise, and the ostler had stood out and seen it pass by, the boygoing a good pace, and driving very steady.There was nothing in all this either to astonish or interest, and itcaught Emma's attention only as it united with the subject which alreadyengaged her mind. The contrast between Mrs. Churchill's importance inthe world, and Jane Fairfax's, struck her; one was every thing, theother nothing--and she sat musing on the difference of woman's destiny,and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixed, till roused by MissBates's saying,"Aye, I see what you are thinking of, the pianoforte. What is to becomeof that?--Very true. Poor dear Jane was talking of it just now.--'Youmust go,' said she. 'You and I must part. You will have no businesshere.--Let it stay, however,' said she; 'give it houseroom till ColonelCampbell comes back. I shall talk about it to him; he will settle forme; he will help me out of all my difficulties]
 [--And to this day, I dobelieve, she knows not whether it was his present or his daughter's]
 [Now Emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte; and the remembrance ofall her former fanciful and unfair conjectures was so little pleasing,that she soon allowed herself to believe her visit had been long enough;and, with a repetition of every thing that she could venture to say ofthe good wishes which she really felt, took leave.CHAPTER IXEmma's pensive meditations, as she walked home, were not interrupted;but on entering the parlour, she found those who must rouse her. Mr.Knightley and Harriet had arrived during her absence, and were sittingwith her father.--Mr. Knightley immediately got up, and in a mannerdecidedly graver than usual, said,"I would not go away without seeing you, but I have no time to spare,and therefore must now be gone directly. I am going to London, to spenda few days with John and Isabella. Have you any thing to send or say,besides the 'love,' which nobody carries?""Nothing at all. But is not this a sudden scheme?""Yes--rather--I have been thinking of it some little time]
 [Emma was sure he had not forgiven her; he looked unlike himself. Time,however, she thought, would tell him that they ought to be friendsagain. While he stood, as if meaning to go, but not going--her fatherbegan his inquiries]
 [Well, my dear, and did you get there safely?--And how did you find myworthy old friend and her daughter?--I dare say they must have been verymuch obliged to you for coming. Dear Emma has been to call on Mrs.and Miss Bates, Mr. Knightley, as I told you before. She is always soattentive to them!"Emma's colour was heightened by this unjust praise; and with asmile, and shake of the head, which spoke much, she looked at Mr.Knightley.--It seemed as if there were an instantaneous impression inher favour, as if his eyes received the truth from hers, and all thathad passed of good in her feelings were at once caught and honoured.--He looked at her with a glow of regard. She was warmly gratified--and inanother moment still more so, by a little movement of more than commonfriendliness on his part.--He took her hand;--whether she had notherself made the first motion, she could not say--she might, perhaps,have rather offered it--but he took her hand, pressed it, and certainlywas on the point of carrying it to his lips--when, from some fancy orother, he suddenly let it go.--Why he should feel such a scruple, whyhe should change his mind when it was all but done, she could notperceive.--He would have judged better, she thought, if he had notstopped.--The intention, however, was indubitable; and whether it wasthat his manners had in general so little gallantry, or however else ithappened, but she thought nothing became him more.--It was with him,of so simple, yet so dignified a nature.--She could not but recall theattempt with great satisfaction. It spoke such perfect amity.--He leftthem immediately afterwards--gone in a moment. He always moved with thealertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory, butnow he seemed more sudden than usual in his disappearance.Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss Bates, but she wished shehad left her ten minutes earlier;--it would have been a great pleasureto talk over Jane Fairfax's situation with Mr. Knightley.--Neitherwould she regret that he should be going to Brunswick Square, for sheknew how much his visit would be enjoyed--but it might have happenedat a better time--and to have had longer notice of it, would have beenpleasanter.--They parted thorough friends, however; she could notbe deceived as to the meaning of his countenance, and his unfinishedgallantry;--it was all done to assure her that she had fully recoveredhis good opinion.--He had been sitting with them half an hour, shefound. It was a pity that she had not come back earlier!In the hope of diverting her father's thoughts from the disagreeablenessof Mr. Knightley's going to London; and going so suddenly; and going onhorseback, which she knew would be all very bad; Emma communicated hernews of Jane Fairfax, and her dependence on the effect was justified;it supplied a very useful check,--interested, without disturbing him. Hehad long made up his mind to Jane Fairfax's going out as governess, andcould talk of it cheerfully, but Mr. Knightley's going to London hadbeen an unexpected blow]
 [I am very glad, indeed, my dear, to hear she is to be so comfortablysettled. Mrs. Elton is very good-natured and agreeable, and I dare sayher acquaintance are just what they ought to be. I hope it is a drysituation, and that her health will be taken good care of. It ought tobe a first object, as I am sure poor Miss Taylor's always was with me.You know, my dear, she is going to be to this new lady what Miss Taylorwas to us. And I hope she will be better off in one respect, and not beinduced to go away after it has been her home so long]
 [The following day brought news from Richmond to throw every thing elseinto the background. An express arrived at Randalls to announce thedeath of Mrs. Churchill! Though her nephew had had no particular reasonto hasten back on her account, she had not lived above six-and-thirtyhours after his return. A sudden seizure of a different nature from anything foreboded by her general state, had carried her off after a shortstruggle. The great Mrs. Churchill was no more.It was felt as such things must be felt. Every body had a degree ofgravity and sorrow; tenderness towards the departed, solicitude for thesurviving friends; and, in a reasonable time, curiosity to know whereshe would be buried. Goldsmith tells us, that when lovely woman stoopsto folly, she has nothing to do but to die; and when she stoops to bedisagreeable, it is equally to be recommended as a clearer of ill-fame.Mrs. Churchill, after being disliked at least twenty-five years, wasnow spoken of with compassionate allowances. In one point she was fullyjustified. She had never been admitted before to be seriously ill. Theevent acquitted her of all the fancifulness, and all the selfishness ofimaginary complaints]
 [Poor Mrs. Churchill! no doubt she had been suffering a great deal:more than any body had ever supposed--and continual pain would try thetemper. It was a sad event--a great shock--with all her faults, whatwould Mr. Churchill do without her? Mr. Churchill's loss would bedreadful indeed. Mr. Churchill would never get over it]
 [--Even Mr.Weston shook his head, and looked solemn, and said, "Ah! poor woman,who would have thought it!" and resolved, that his mourning should be ashandsome as possible; and his wife sat sighing and moralising over herbroad hems with a commiseration and good sense, true and steady. How itwould affect Frank was among the earliest thoughts of both. It was alsoa very early speculation with Emma. The character of Mrs. Churchill,the grief of her husband--her mind glanced over them both with awe andcompassion--and then rested with lightened feelings on how Frank mightbe affected by the event, how benefited, how freed. She saw in a momentall the possible good. Now, an attachment to Harriet Smith would havenothing to encounter. Mr. Churchill, independent of his wife, was fearedby nobody; an easy, guidable man, to be persuaded into any thing by hisnephew. All that remained to be wished was, that the nephew should formthe attachment, as, with all her goodwill in the cause, Emma could feelno certainty of its being already formed.Harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion, with great self-command.What ever she might feel of brighter hope, she betrayed nothing. Emmawas gratified, to observe such a proof in her of strengthened character,and refrained from any allusion that might endanger its maintenance.They spoke, therefore, of Mrs. Churchill's death with mutualforbearance.Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls, communicating allthat was immediately important of their state and plans. Mr. Churchillwas better than could be expected; and their first removal, on thedeparture of the funeral for Yorkshire, was to be to the house of a veryold friend in Windsor, to whom Mr. Churchill had been promising avisit the last ten years. At present, there was nothing to be done forHarriet; good wishes for the future were all that could yet be possibleon Emma's side.It was a more pressing concern to shew attention to Jane Fairfax, whoseprospects were closing, while Harriet's opened, and whose engagementsnow allowed of no delay in any one at Highbury, who wished to shew herkindness--and with Emma it was grown into a first wish. She had scarcelya stronger regret than for her past coldness; and the person, whom shehad been so many months neglecting, was now the very one on whom shewould have lavished every distinction of regard or sympathy. She wantedto be of use to her; wanted to shew a value for her society, and testifyrespect and consideration. She resolved to prevail on her to spend a dayat Hartfield. A note was written to urge it. The invitation was refused,and by a verbal message. "Miss Fairfax was not well enough to write;"and when Mr. Perry called at Hartfield, the same morning, it appearedthat she was so much indisposed as to have been visited, though againsther own consent, by himself, and that she was suffering under severeheadaches, and a nervous fever to a degree, which made him doubt thepossibility of her going to Mrs. Smallridge's at the time proposed.Her health seemed for the moment completely deranged--appetite quitegone--and though there were no absolutely alarming symptoms, nothingtouching the pulmonary complaint, which was the standing apprehensionof the family, Mr. Perry was uneasy about her. He thought she hadundertaken more than she was equal to, and that she felt it so herself,though she would not own it. Her spirits seemed overcome. Herpresent home, he could not but observe, was unfavourable to a nervousdisorder:--confined always to one room;--he could have wished itotherwise--and her good aunt, though his very old friend, he mustacknowledge to be not the best companion for an invalid of thatdescription. Her care and attention could not be questioned; they were,in fact, only too great. He very much feared that Miss Fairfax derivedmore evil than good from them. Emma listened with the warmest concern;grieved for her more and more, and looked around eager to discover someway of being useful. To take her--be it only an hour or two--fromher aunt, to give her change of air and scene, and quiet rationalconversation, even for an hour or two, might do her good; and thefollowing morning she wrote again to say, in the most feeling languageshe could command, that she would call for her in the carriage at anyhour that Jane would name--mentioning that she had Mr. Perry's decidedopinion, in favour of such exercise for his patient. The answer was onlyin this short note:"Miss Fairfax's compliments and thanks, but is quite unequal to anyexercise]
 [Emma felt that her own note had deserved something better; but it wasimpossible to quarrel with words, whose tremulous inequality shewedindisposition so plainly, and she thought only of how she might bestcounteract this unwillingness to be seen or assisted. In spite of theanswer, therefore, she ordered the carriage, and drove to Mrs. Bates's,in the hope that Jane would be induced to join her--but it would notdo;--Miss Bates came to the carriage door, all gratitude, and agreeingwith her most earnestly in thinking an airing might be of the greatestservice--and every thing that message could do was tried--but all invain. Miss Bates was obliged to return without success; Jane wasquite unpersuadable; the mere proposal of going out seemed to make herworse.--Emma wished she could have seen her, and tried her own powers;but, almost before she could hint the wish, Miss Bates made it appearthat she had promised her niece on no account to let Miss Woodhouse in]
 [Indeed, the truth was, that poor dear Jane could not bear to see anybody--any body at all--Mrs. Elton, indeed, could not be denied--andMrs. Cole had made such a point--and Mrs. Perry had said so much--but,except them, Jane would really see nobody]
 [Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs. Eltons, the Mrs. Perrys,and the Mrs. Coles, who would force themselves anywhere; neither couldshe feel any right of preference herself--she submitted, therefore, andonly questioned Miss Bates farther as to her niece's appetite and diet,which she longed to be able to assist. On that subject poor Miss Bateswas very unhappy, and very communicative; Jane would hardly eat anything:--Mr. Perry recommended nourishing food; but every thingthey could command (and never had any body such good neighbours) wasdistasteful.Emma, on reaching home, called the housekeeper directly, to anexamination of her stores; and some arrowroot of very superior qualitywas speedily despatched to Miss Bates with a most friendly note. In halfan hour the arrowroot was returned, with a thousand thanks from MissBates, but "dear Jane would not be satisfied without its being sentback; it was a thing she could not take--and, moreover, she insisted onher saying, that she was not at all in want of any thing]
 [When Emma afterwards heard that Jane Fairfax had been seen wanderingabout the meadows, at some distance from Highbury, on the afternoon ofthe very day on which she had, under the plea of being unequal to anyexercise, so peremptorily refused to go out with her in the carriage,she could have no doubt--putting every thing together--that Jane wasresolved to receive no kindness from _her_. She was sorry, very sorry.Her heart was grieved for a state which seemed but the more pitiablefrom this sort of irritation of spirits, inconsistency of action, andinequality of powers; and it mortified her that she was given so littlecredit for proper feeling, or esteemed so little worthy as a friend: butshe had the consolation of knowing that her intentions were good, and ofbeing able to say to herself, that could Mr. Knightley have been privyto all her attempts of assisting Jane Fairfax, could he even have seeninto her heart, he would not, on this occasion, have found any thing toreprove.CHAPTER XOne morning, about ten days after Mrs. Churchill's decease, Emma wascalled downstairs to Mr. Weston, who "could not stay five minutes,and wanted particularly to speak with her]
 [--He met her at theparlour-door, and hardly asking her how she did, in the natural key ofhis voice, sunk it immediately, to say, unheard by her father,"Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning?--Do, if it bepossible. Mrs. Weston wants to see you. She must see you]
 ["Is she unwell?""No, no, not at all--only a little agitated. She would have ordered thecarriage, and come to you, but she must see you _alone_, and that youknow--(nodding towards her father)--Humph!--Can you come?""Certainly. This moment, if you please. It is impossible to refuse whatyou ask in such a way. But what can be the matter?--Is she really notill?""Depend upon me--but ask no more questions. You will know it all intime. The most unaccountable business! But hush, hush!"To guess what all this meant, was impossible even for Emma. Somethingreally important seemed announced by his looks; but, as her friend waswell, she endeavoured not to be uneasy, and settling it with her father,that she would take her walk now, she and Mr. Weston were soon out ofthe house together and on their way at a quick pace for Randalls]
 [Now,"--said Emma, when they were fairly beyond the sweep gates,--"nowMr. Weston, do let me know what has happened]
 ["No, no,"--he gravely replied.--"Don't ask me. I promised my wife toleave it all to her. She will break it to you better than I can. Do notbe impatient, Emma; it will all come out too soon]
 ["Break it to me," cried Emma, standing still with terror.--"GoodGod!--Mr. Weston, tell me at once.--Something has happened in BrunswickSquare. I know it has. Tell me, I charge you tell me this moment what itis]
 ["No, indeed you are mistaken]
 [--"Mr. Weston do not trifle with me.--Consider how many of my dearestfriends are now in Brunswick Square. Which of them is it?--I charge youby all that is sacred, not to attempt concealment]
 ["Upon my word, Emma]
 [--"Your word!--why not your honour!--why not say upon your honour, thatit has nothing to do with any of them? Good Heavens!--What can be to be_broke_ to me, that does not relate to one of that family?""Upon my honour," said he very seriously, "it does not. It is not inthe smallest degree connected with any human being of the name ofKnightley]
 [Emma's courage returned, and she walked on]
 [I was wrong," he continued, "in talking of its being _broke_ to you.I should not have used the expression. In fact, it does not concernyou--it concerns only myself,--that is, we hope.--Humph!--In short, mydear Emma, there is no occasion to be so uneasy about it. I don'tsay that it is not a disagreeable business--but things might be muchworse.--If we walk fast, we shall soon be at Randalls]
 [Emma found that she must wait; and now it required little effort. Sheasked no more questions therefore, merely employed her own fancy, andthat soon pointed out to her the probability of its being some moneyconcern--something just come to light, of a disagreeable nature in thecircumstances of the family,--something which the late event at Richmondhad brought forward. Her fancy was very active. Half a dozen naturalchildren, perhaps--and poor Frank cut off!--This, though veryundesirable, would be no matter of agony to her. It inspired little morethan an animating curiosity]
 [Who is that gentleman on horseback?" said she, as theyproceeded--speaking more to assist Mr. Weston in keeping his secret,than with any other view]
 [I do not know.--One of the Otways.--Not Frank;--it is not Frank, Iassure you. You will not see him. He is half way to Windsor by thistime]
 ["Has your son been with you, then?""Oh! yes--did not you know?--Well, well, never mind]
 [For a moment he was silent; and then added, in a tone much more guardedand demure,"Yes, Frank came over this morning, just to ask us how we did]
 [They hurried on, and were speedily at Randalls.--"Well, my dear," saidhe, as they entered the room--"I have brought her, and now I hope youwill soon be better. I shall leave you together. There is no use indelay. I shall not be far off, if you want me]
 [--And Emma distinctlyheard him add, in a lower tone, before he quitted the room,--"I havebeen as good as my word. She has not the least idea]
 [Mrs. Weston was looking so ill, and had an air of so much perturbation,that Emma's uneasiness increased; and the moment they were alone, sheeagerly said,"What is it my dear friend? Something of a very unpleasant nature, Ifind, has occurred;--do let me know directly what it is. I have beenwalking all this way in complete suspense. We both abhor suspense.Do not let mine continue longer. It will do you good to speak of yourdistress, whatever it may be]
 ["Have you indeed no idea?" said Mrs. Weston in a trembling voice]
 [Cannot you, my dear Emma--cannot you form a guess as to what you are tohear?""So far as that it relates to Mr. Frank Churchill, I do guess]
 ["You are right. It does relate to him, and I will tell you directly;"(resuming her work, and seeming resolved against looking up.) "He hasbeen here this very morning, on a most extraordinary errand. It isimpossible to express our surprize. He came to speak to his father on asubject,--to announce an attachment--"She stopped to breathe. Emma thought first of herself, and then ofHarriet]
 [More than an attachment, indeed," resumed Mrs. Weston; "anengagement--a positive engagement.--What will you say, Emma--what willany body say, when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax areengaged;--nay, that they have been long engaged!"Emma even jumped with surprize;--and, horror-struck, exclaimed,"Jane Fairfax!--Good God! You are not serious? You do not mean it?""You may well be amazed," returned Mrs. Weston, still averting her eyes,and talking on with eagerness, that Emma might have time to recover--"You may well be amazed. But it is even so. There has been a solemnengagement between them ever since October--formed at Weymouth, andkept a secret from every body. Not a creature knowing it butthemselves--neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor his.--It is sowonderful, that though perfectly convinced of the fact, it is yet almostincredible to myself. I can hardly believe it.--I thought I knew him]
 [Emma scarcely heard what was said.--Her mind was divided between twoideas--her own former conversations with him about Miss Fairfax; andpoor Harriet;--and for some time she could only exclaim, and requireconfirmation, repeated confirmation]
 [Well," said she at last, trying to recover herself; "this is acircumstance which I must think of at least half a day, before I can atall comprehend it. What!--engaged to her all the winter--before eitherof them came to Highbury?""Engaged since October,--secretly engaged.--It has hurt me, Emma, verymuch. It has hurt his father equally. _Some_ _part_ of his conduct wecannot excuse]
 [Emma pondered a moment, and then replied, "I will not pretend _not_ tounderstand you; and to give you all the relief in my power, be assuredthat no such effect has followed his attentions to me, as you areapprehensive of]
 [Mrs. Weston looked up, afraid to believe; but Emma's countenance was assteady as her words]
 [That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast, of mypresent perfect indifference," she continued, "I will farther tell you,that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance, when Idid like him, when I was very much disposed to be attached to him--nay,was attached--and how it came to cease, is perhaps the wonder.Fortunately, however, it did cease. I have really for some time past,for at least these three months, cared nothing about him. You maybelieve me, Mrs. Weston. This is the simple truth]
 [Mrs. Weston kissed her with tears of joy; and when she could findutterance, assured her, that this protestation had done her more goodthan any thing else in the world could do]
 [Mr. Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself," said she. "Onthis point we have been wretched. It was our darling wish that youmight be attached to each other--and we were persuaded that it was so.--Imagine what we have been feeling on your account]
 ["I have escaped; and that I should escape, may be a matter of gratefulwonder to you and myself. But this does not acquit _him_, Mrs. Weston;and I must say, that I think him greatly to blame. What right had heto come among us with affection and faith engaged, and with mannersso _very_ disengaged? What right had he to endeavour to please, ashe certainly did--to distinguish any one young woman with perseveringattention, as he certainly did--while he really belonged toanother?--How could he tell what mischief he might be doing?--How couldhe tell that he might not be making me in love with him?--very wrong,very wrong indeed]
 ["From something that he said, my dear Emma, I rather imagine--""And how could _she_ bear such behaviour! Composure with a witness!to look on, while repeated attentions were offering to another woman,before her face, and not resent it.--That is a degree of placidity,which I can neither comprehend nor respect]
 ["There were misunderstandings between them, Emma; he said so expressly.He had not time to enter into much explanation. He was here only aquarter of an hour, and in a state of agitation which did not allowthe full use even of the time he could stay--but that there had beenmisunderstandings he decidedly said. The present crisis, indeed,seemed to be brought on by them; and those misunderstandings might verypossibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct]
 ["Impropriety! Oh! Mrs. Weston--it is too calm a censure. Much, muchbeyond impropriety!--It has sunk him, I cannot say how it has sunk himin my opinion. So unlike what a man should be!--None of that uprightintegrity, that strict adherence to truth and principle, that disdain oftrick and littleness, which a man should display in every transaction ofhis life]
 ["Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part; for though he has been wrongin this instance, I have known him long enough to answer for his havingmany, very many, good qualities; and--""Good God!" cried Emma, not attending to her.--"Mrs. Smallridge, too!Jane actually on the point of going as governess! What could he mean bysuch horrible indelicacy? To suffer her to engage herself--to suffer hereven to think of such a measure!""He knew nothing about it, Emma. On this article I can fully acquithim. It was a private resolution of hers, not communicated to him--or atleast not communicated in a way to carry conviction.--Till yesterday, Iknow he said he was in the dark as to her plans. They burst on him, I donot know how, but by some letter or message--and it was the discovery ofwhat she was doing, of this very project of hers, which determined himto come forward at once, own it all to his uncle, throw himself onhis kindness, and, in short, put an end to the miserable state ofconcealment that had been carrying on so long]
 [Emma began to listen better]
 [I am to hear from him soon," continued Mrs. Weston. "He told me atparting, that he should soon write; and he spoke in a manner whichseemed to promise me many particulars that could not be given now. Letus wait, therefore, for this letter. It may bring many extenuations. Itmay make many things intelligible and excusable which now are not tobe understood. Don't let us be severe, don't let us be in a hurry tocondemn him. Let us have patience. I must love him; and now that I amsatisfied on one point, the one material point, I am sincerely anxiousfor its all turning out well, and ready to hope that it may. They mustboth have suffered a great deal under such a system of secresy andconcealment]
 ["_His_ sufferings," replied Emma dryly, "do not appear to have done himmuch harm. Well, and how did Mr. Churchill take it?""Most favourably for his nephew--gave his consent with scarcely adifficulty. Conceive what the events of a week have done in that family!While poor Mrs. Churchill lived, I suppose there could not have been ahope, a chance, a possibility;--but scarcely are her remains at rest inthe family vault, than her husband is persuaded to act exactly oppositeto what she would have required. What a blessing it is, when undueinfluence does not survive the grave!--He gave his consent with verylittle persuasion]
 ["Ah!" thought Emma, "he would have done as much for Harriet]
 ["This was settled last night, and Frank was off with the light thismorning. He stopped at Highbury, at the Bates's, I fancy, some time--andthen came on hither; but was in such a hurry to get back to his uncle,to whom he is just now more necessary than ever, that, as I tell you,he could stay with us but a quarter of an hour.--He was very muchagitated--very much, indeed--to a degree that made him appear quitea different creature from any thing I had ever seen him before.--Inaddition to all the rest, there had been the shock of finding her sovery unwell, which he had had no previous suspicion of--and there wasevery appearance of his having been feeling a great deal]
 ["And do you really believe the affair to have been carrying on with suchperfect secresy?--The Campbells, the Dixons, did none of them know ofthe engagement?"Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush]
 [None; not one. He positively said that it had been known to no being inthe world but their two selves]
 ["Well," said Emma, "I suppose we shall gradually grow reconciled to theidea, and I wish them very happy. But I shall always think it avery abominable sort of proceeding. What has it been but a system ofhypocrisy and deceit,--espionage, and treachery?--To come among us withprofessions of openness and simplicity; and such a league in secretto judge us all!--Here have we been, the whole winter and spring,completely duped, fancying ourselves all on an equal footing of truthand honour, with two people in the midst of us who may have beencarrying round, comparing and sitting in judgment on sentiments andwords that were never meant for both to hear.--They must take theconsequence, if they have heard each other spoken of in a way notperfectly agreeable!""I am quite easy on that head," replied Mrs. Weston. "I am very surethat I never said any thing of either to the other, which both might nothave heard]
 ["You are in luck.--Your only blunder was confined to my ear, when youimagined a certain friend of ours in love with the lady]
 ["True. But as I have always had a thoroughly good opinion of MissFairfax, I never could, under any blunder, have spoken ill of her; andas to speaking ill of him, there I must have been safe]
 [At this moment Mr. Weston appeared at a little distance from the window,evidently on the watch. His wife gave him a look which invited himin; and, while he was coming round, added, "Now, dearest Emma, let meintreat you to say and look every thing that may set his heart at ease,and incline him to be satisfied with the match. Let us make the best ofit--and, indeed, almost every thing may be fairly said in her favour. Itis not a connexion to gratify; but if Mr. Churchill does not feel that,why should we? and it may be a very fortunate circumstance for him, forFrank, I mean, that he should have attached himself to a girl of suchsteadiness of character and good judgment as I have always given hercredit for--and still am disposed to give her credit for, in spite ofthis one great deviation from the strict rule of right. And how much maybe said in her situation for even that error!""Much, indeed!" cried Emma feelingly. "If a woman can ever beexcused for thinking only of herself, it is in a situation like JaneFairfax's.--Of such, one may almost say, that 'the world is not their's,nor the world's law]
 ["She met Mr. Weston on his entrance, with a smiling countenance,exclaiming,"A very pretty trick you have been playing me, upon my word! This was adevice, I suppose, to sport with my curiosity, and exercise my talent ofguessing. But you really frightened me. I thought you had lost halfyour property, at least. And here, instead of its being a matter ofcondolence, it turns out to be one of congratulation.--I congratulateyou, Mr. Weston, with all my heart, on the prospect of having one of themost lovely and accomplished young women in England for your daughter]
 [A glance or two between him and his wife, convinced him that all was asright as this speech proclaimed; and its happy effect on his spirits wasimmediate. His air and voice recovered their usual briskness: he shookher heartily and gratefully by the hand, and entered on the subject ina manner to prove, that he now only wanted time and persuasion to thinkthe engagement no very bad thing. His companions suggested only whatcould palliate imprudence, or smooth objections; and by the time theyhad talked it all over together, and he had talked it all over againwith Emma, in their walk back to Hartfield, he was become perfectlyreconciled, and not far from thinking it the very best thing that Frankcould possibly have done.CHAPTER XI"Harriet, poor Harriet!"--Those were the words; in them lay thetormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of, and which constitutedthe real misery of the business to her. Frank Churchill had behaved veryill by herself--very ill in many ways,--but it was not so much _his_behaviour as her _own_, which made her so angry with him. It was thescrape which he had drawn her into on Harriet's account, that gave thedeepest hue to his offence.--Poor Harriet! to be a second time thedupe of her misconceptions and flattery. Mr. Knightley had spokenprophetically, when he once said, "Emma, you have been no friendto Harriet Smith]
 [--She was afraid she had done her nothing butdisservice.--It was true that she had not to charge herself, in thisinstance as in the former, with being the sole and original author ofthe mischief; with having suggested such feelings as might otherwisenever have entered Harriet's imagination; for Harriet had acknowledgedher admiration and preference of Frank Churchill before she had evergiven her a hint on the subject; but she felt completely guiltyof having encouraged what she might have repressed. She might haveprevented the indulgence and increase of such sentiments. Her influencewould have been enough. And now she was very conscious that she oughtto have prevented them.--She felt that she had been risking her friend'shappiness on most insufficient grounds. Common sense would have directedher to tell Harriet, that she must not allow herself to think of him,and that there were five hundred chances to one against his ever caringfor her.--"But, with common sense," she added, "I am afraid I have hadlittle to do]
 [She was extremely angry with herself. If she could not have been angrywith Frank Churchill too, it would have been dreadful.--As for JaneFairfax, she might at least relieve her feelings from any presentsolicitude on her account. Harriet would be anxiety enough; she needno longer be unhappy about Jane, whose troubles and whose ill-healthhaving, of course, the same origin, must be equally under cure.--Herdays of insignificance and evil were over.--She would soon be well, andhappy, and prosperous.--Emma could now imagine why her own attentionshad been slighted. This discovery laid many smaller matters open. Nodoubt it had been from jealousy.--In Jane's eyes she had been a rival;and well might any thing she could offer of assistance or regard berepulsed. An airing in the Hartfield carriage would have been the rack,and arrowroot from the Hartfield storeroom must have been poison. Sheunderstood it all; and as far as her mind could disengage itself fromthe injustice and selfishness of angry feelings, she acknowledged thatJane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond herdesert. But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge! There was littlesympathy to be spared for any body else. Emma was sadly fearfulthat this second disappointment would be more severe than the first.Considering the very superior claims of the object, it ought; andjudging by its apparently stronger effect on Harriet's mind, producingreserve and self-command, it would.--She must communicate the painfultruth, however, and as soon as possible. An injunction of secresy hadbeen among Mr. Weston's parting words. "For the present, the wholeaffair was to be completely a secret. Mr. Churchill had made a point ofit, as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost;and every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum]
 [--Emma hadpromised; but still Harriet must be excepted. It was her superior duty.In spite of her vexation, she could not help feeling it almostridiculous, that she should have the very same distressing and delicateoffice to perform by Harriet, which Mrs. Weston had just gone through byherself. The intelligence, which had been so anxiously announced to her,she was now to be anxiously announcing to another. Her heart beat quickon hearing Harriet's footstep and voice; so, she supposed, had poor Mrs.Weston felt when _she_ was approaching Randalls. Could the event ofthe disclosure bear an equal resemblance!--But of that, unfortunately,there could be no chance]
 [Well, Miss Woodhouse!" cried Harriet, coming eagerly into the room--"isnot this the oddest news that ever was?""What news do you mean?" replied Emma, unable to guess, by look orvoice, whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint]
 [About Jane Fairfax. Did you ever hear any thing so strange? Oh!--youneed not be afraid of owning it to me, for Mr. Weston has told mehimself. I met him just now. He told me it was to be a great secret;and, therefore, I should not think of mentioning it to any body but you,but he said you knew it]
 ["What did Mr. Weston tell you?"--said Emma, still perplexed]
 [Oh! he told me all about it; that Jane Fairfax and Mr. Frank Churchillare to be married, and that they have been privately engaged to oneanother this long while. How very odd!"It was, indeed, so odd; Harriet's behaviour was so extremely odd,that Emma did not know how to understand it. Her character appearedabsolutely changed. She seemed to propose shewing no agitation, ordisappointment, or peculiar concern in the discovery. Emma looked ather, quite unable to speak]
 [Had you any idea," cried Harriet, "of his being in love with her?--You,perhaps, might.--You (blushing as she spoke) who can see into everybody's heart; but nobody else--""Upon my word," said Emma, "I begin to doubt my having any such talent.Can you seriously ask me, Harriet, whether I imagined him attachedto another woman at the very time that I was--tacitly, if notopenly--encouraging you to give way to your own feelings?--I neverhad the slightest suspicion, till within the last hour, of Mr. FrankChurchill's having the least regard for Jane Fairfax. You may be verysure that if I had, I should have cautioned you accordingly]
 ["Me!" cried Harriet, colouring, and astonished. "Why should you cautionme?--You do not think I care about Mr. Frank Churchill]
 ["I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject," repliedEmma, smiling; "but you do not mean to deny that there was a time--andnot very distant either--when you gave me reason to understand that youdid care about him?""Him!--never, never. Dear Miss Woodhouse, how could you so mistake me?"turning away distressed]
 [Harriet!" cried Emma, after a moment's pause--"What do you mean?--GoodHeaven! what do you mean?--Mistake you!--Am I to suppose then?--"She could not speak another word.--Her voice was lost; and she sat down,waiting in great terror till Harriet should answer.Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and with face turned fromher, did not immediately say any thing; and when she did speak, it wasin a voice nearly as agitated as Emma's]
 [I should not have thought it possible," she began, "that you could havemisunderstood me! I know we agreed never to name him--but consideringhow infinitely superior he is to every body else, I should not havethought it possible that I could be supposed to mean any other person.Mr. Frank Churchill, indeed! I do not know who would ever look at him inthe company of the other. I hope I have a better taste than to think ofMr. Frank Churchill, who is like nobody by his side. And that you shouldhave been so mistaken, is amazing!--I am sure, but for believing thatyou entirely approved and meant to encourage me in my attachment, Ishould have considered it at first too great a presumption almost,to dare to think of him. At first, if you had not told me that morewonderful things had happened; that there had been matches of greaterdisparity (those were your very words);--I should not have dared togive way to--I should not have thought it possible--But if _you_, whohad been always acquainted with him--""Harriet!" cried Emma, collecting herself resolutely--"Let us understandeach other now, without the possibility of farther mistake. Are youspeaking of--Mr. Knightley?""To be sure I am. I never could have an idea of any body else--and soI thought you knew. When we talked about him, it was as clear aspossible]
 ["Not quite," returned Emma, with forced calmness, "for all that you thensaid, appeared to me to relate to a different person. I could almostassert that you had _named_ Mr. Frank Churchill. I am sure the serviceMr. Frank Churchill had rendered you, in protecting you from thegipsies, was spoken of]
 ["Oh! Miss Woodhouse, how you do forget!""My dear Harriet, I perfectly remember the substance of what I said onthe occasion. I told you that I did not wonder at your attachment;that considering the service he had rendered you, it was extremelynatural:--and you agreed to it, expressing yourself very warmly as toyour sense of that service, and mentioning even what your sensations hadbeen in seeing him come forward to your rescue.--The impression of it isstrong on my memory]
 ["Oh, dear," cried Harriet, "now I recollect what you mean; but Iwas thinking of something very different at the time. It was not thegipsies--it was not Mr. Frank Churchill that I meant. No! (with someelevation) I was thinking of a much more precious circumstance--of Mr.Knightley's coming and asking me to dance, when Mr. Elton would notstand up with me; and when there was no other partner in the room. Thatwas the kind action; that was the noble benevolence and generosity; thatwas the service which made me begin to feel how superior he was to everyother being upon earth]
 ["Good God!" cried Emma, "this has been a most unfortunate--mostdeplorable mistake!--What is to be done?""You would not have encouraged me, then, if you had understood me? Atleast, however, I cannot be worse off than I should have been, if theother had been the person; and now--it _is_ possible--"She paused a few moments. Emma could not speak]
 [I do not wonder, Miss Woodhouse," she resumed, "that you should feel agreat difference between the two, as to me or as to any body. You mustthink one five hundred million times more above me than the other. ButI hope, Miss Woodhouse, that supposing--that if--strange as it mayappear--. But you know they were your own words, that _more_ wonderfulthings had happened, matches of _greater_ disparity had taken place thanbetween Mr. Frank Churchill and me; and, therefore, it seems as if sucha thing even as this, may have occurred before--and if I should be sofortunate, beyond expression, as to--if Mr. Knightley should really--if_he_ does not mind the disparity, I hope, dear Miss Woodhouse, you willnot set yourself against it, and try to put difficulties in the way. Butyou are too good for that, I am sure]
 [Harriet was standing at one of the windows. Emma turned round to look ather in consternation, and hastily said,"Have you any idea of Mr. Knightley's returning your affection?""Yes," replied Harriet modestly, but not fearfully--"I must say that Ihave]
 [Emma's eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat silently meditating,in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes. A few minutes were sufficientfor making her acquainted with her own heart. A mind like hers,once opening to suspicion, made rapid progress. She touched--sheadmitted--she acknowledged the whole truth. Why was it so much worsethat Harriet should be in love with Mr. Knightley, than with FrankChurchill? Why was the evil so dreadfully increased by Harriet's havingsome hope of a return? It darted through her, with the speed of anarrow, that Mr. Knightley must marry no one but herself!Her own conduct, as well as her own heart, was before her in the samefew minutes. She saw it all with a clearness which had never blessedher before. How improperly had she been acting by Harriet! Howinconsiderate, how indelicate, how irrational, how unfeeling had beenher conduct! What blindness, what madness, had led her on! It struck herwith dreadful force, and she was ready to give it every bad name in theworld. Some portion of respect for herself, however, in spite of allthese demerits--some concern for her own appearance, and a strong senseof justice by Harriet--(there would be no need of _compassion_ to thegirl who believed herself loved by Mr. Knightley--but justice requiredthat she should not be made unhappy by any coldness now,) gave Emma theresolution to sit and endure farther with calmness, with even apparentkindness.--For her own advantage indeed, it was fit that the utmostextent of Harriet's hopes should be enquired into; and Harriet had donenothing to forfeit the regard and interest which had been so voluntarilyformed and maintained--or to deserve to be slighted by the person, whosecounsels had never led her right.--Rousing from reflection, therefore,and subduing her emotion, she turned to Harriet again, and, in a moreinviting accent, renewed the conversation; for as to the subject whichhad first introduced it, the wonderful story of Jane Fairfax, that wasquite sunk and lost.--Neither of them thought but of Mr. Knightley andthemselves.Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy reverie, was yet very gladto be called from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a judge, andsuch a friend as Miss Woodhouse, and only wanted invitation, to givethe history of her hopes with great, though trembling delight.--Emma'stremblings as she asked, and as she listened, were better concealed thanHarriet's, but they were not less. Her voice was not unsteady; but hermind was in all the perturbation that such a development of self, sucha burst of threatening evil, such a confusion of sudden and perplexingemotions, must create.--She listened with much inward suffering, butwith great outward patience, to Harriet's detail.--Methodical, or wellarranged, or very well delivered, it could not be expected to be; but itcontained, when separated from all the feebleness and tautology ofthe narration, a substance to sink her spirit--especially with thecorroborating circumstances, which her own memory brought in favour ofMr. Knightley's most improved opinion of Harriet.Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever sincethose two decisive dances.--Emma knew that he had, on that occasion,found her much superior to his expectation. From that evening, or atleast from the time of Miss Woodhouse's encouraging her to think of him,Harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking to her much more than hehad been used to do, and of his having indeed quite a different mannertowards her; a manner of kindness and sweetness!--Latterly she had beenmore and more aware of it. When they had been all walking together,he had so often come and walked by her, and talked so verydelightfully!--He seemed to want to be acquainted with her. Emma knew itto have been very much the case. She had often observed the change, toalmost the same extent.--Harriet repeated expressions of approbationand praise from him--and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreementwith what she had known of his opinion of Harriet. He praised her forbeing without art or affectation, for having simple, honest, generous,feelings.--She knew that he saw such recommendations in Harriet; hehad dwelt on them to her more than once.--Much that lived in Harriet'smemory, many little particulars of the notice she had received fromhim, a look, a speech, a removal from one chair to another, a complimentimplied, a preference inferred, had been unnoticed, because unsuspected,by Emma. Circumstances that might swell to half an hour's relation,and contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen them, had passedundiscerned by her who now heard them; but the two latest occurrences tobe mentioned, the two of strongest promise to Harriet, were not withoutsome degree of witness from Emma herself.--The first, was his walkingwith her apart from the others, in the lime-walk at Donwell, where theyhad been walking some time before Emma came, and he had taken pains (asshe was convinced) to draw her from the rest to himself--and at first,he had talked to her in a more particular way than he had ever donebefore, in a very particular way indeed!--(Harriet could not recallit without a blush.) He seemed to be almost asking her, whether heraffections were engaged.--But as soon as she (Miss Woodhouse) appearedlikely to join them, he changed the subject, and began talking aboutfarming:--The second, was his having sat talking with her nearly halfan hour before Emma came back from her visit, the very last morning ofhis being at Hartfield--though, when he first came in, he had said thathe could not stay five minutes--and his having told her, during theirconversation, that though he must go to London, it was very much againsthis inclination that he left home at all, which was much more (asEmma felt) than he had acknowledged to _her_. The superior degree ofconfidence towards Harriet, which this one article marked, gave hersevere pain.On the subject of the first of the two circumstances, she did, after alittle reflection, venture the following question. "Might he not?--Isnot it possible, that when enquiring, as you thought, into the state ofyour affections, he might be alluding to Mr. Martin--he might haveMr. Martin's interest in view? But Harriet rejected the suspicion withspirit]
 [Mr. Martin! No indeed!--There was not a hint of Mr. Martin. I hope Iknow better now, than to care for Mr. Martin, or to be suspected of it]
 [When Harriet had closed her evidence, she appealed to her dear MissWoodhouse, to say whether she had not good ground for hope]
 [I never should have presumed to think of it at first," said she, "butfor you. You told me to observe him carefully, and let his behaviourbe the rule of mine--and so I have. But now I seem to feel that I maydeserve him; and that if he does chuse me, it will not be any thing sovery wonderful]
 [The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech, the many bitter feelings,made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma's side, to enable her to sayon reply,"Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr. Knightley is the lastman in the world, who would intentionally give any woman the idea of hisfeeling for her more than he really does]
 [Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence sosatisfactory; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness, whichat that moment would have been dreadful penance, by the sound of herfather's footsteps. He was coming through the hall. Harriet was toomuch agitated to encounter him. "She could not compose herself--Mr. Woodhouse would be alarmed--she had better go;"--with most readyencouragement from her friend, therefore, she passed off through anotherdoor--and the moment she was gone, this was the spontaneous burst ofEmma's feelings: "Oh God! that I had never seen her!"The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly enough for herthoughts.--She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that hadrushed on her within the last few hours. Every moment had brought afresh surprize; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation toher.--How to understand it all! How to understand the deceptions she hadbeen thus practising on herself, and living under!--The blunders, theblindness of her own head and heart!--she sat still, she walked about,she tried her own room, she tried the shrubbery--in every place, everyposture, she perceived that she had acted most weakly; that she hadbeen imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree; that she hadbeen imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying; that shewas wretched, and should probably find this day but the beginning ofwretchedness.To understand, thoroughly understand her own heart, was the firstendeavour. To that point went every leisure moment which her father'sclaims on her allowed, and every moment of involuntary absence of mind.How long had Mr. Knightley been so dear to her, as every feelingdeclared him now to be? When had his influence, such influence begun?--When had he succeeded to that place in her affection, which FrankChurchill had once, for a short period, occupied?--She looked back;she compared the two--compared them, as they had always stood in herestimation, from the time of the latter's becoming known to her--and asthey must at any time have been compared by her, had it--oh! had it, byany blessed felicity, occurred to her, to institute the comparison.--Shesaw that there never had been a time when she did not consider Mr.Knightley as infinitely the superior, or when his regard for her had notbeen infinitely the most dear. She saw, that in persuading herself,in fancying, in acting to the contrary, she had been entirely under adelusion, totally ignorant of her own heart--and, in short, that she hadnever really cared for Frank Churchill at all!This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection. This wasthe knowledge of herself, on the first question of inquiry, whichshe reached; and without being long in reaching it.--She was mostsorrowfully indignant; ashamed of every sensation but the one revealedto her--her affection for Mr. Knightley.--Every other part of her mindwas disgusting.With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of everybody's feelings; with unpardonable arrogance proposed to arrange everybody's destiny. She was proved to have been universally mistaken; andshe had not quite done nothing--for she had done mischief. She hadbrought evil on Harriet, on herself, and she too much feared, on Mr.Knightley.--Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place, onher must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning; for hisattachment, she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness ofHarriet's;--and even were this not the case, he would never have knownHarriet at all but for her folly.Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!--It was a union to distance everywonder of the kind.--The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfaxbecame commonplace, threadbare, stale in the comparison, exciting nosurprize, presenting no disparity, affording nothing to be said orthought.--Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!--Such an elevation on herside! Such a debasement on his! It was horrible to Emma to think how itmust sink him in the general opinion, to foresee the smiles, the sneers,the merriment it would prompt at his expense; the mortification anddisdain of his brother, the thousand inconveniences to himself.--Couldit be?--No; it was impossible. And yet it was far, very far, fromimpossible.--Was it a new circumstance for a man of first-rate abilitiesto be captivated by very inferior powers? Was it new for one, perhapstoo busy to seek, to be the prize of a girl who would seek him?--Wasit new for any thing in this world to be unequal, inconsistent,incongruous--or for chance and circumstance (as second causes) to directthe human fate?Oh! had she never brought Harriet forward! Had she left her where sheought, and where he had told her she ought!--Had she not, with afolly which no tongue could express, prevented her marrying theunexceptionable young man who would have made her happy and respectablein the line of life to which she ought to belong--all would have beensafe; none of this dreadful sequel would have been.How Harriet could ever have had the presumption to raise her thoughts toMr. Knightley!--How she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of sucha man till actually assured of it!--But Harriet was less humble, hadfewer scruples than formerly.--Her inferiority, whether of mind orsituation, seemed little felt.--She had seemed more sensible of Mr.Elton's being to stoop in marrying her, than she now seemed of Mr.Knightley's.--Alas! was not that her own doing too? Who had been atpains to give Harriet notions of self-consequence but herself?--Who butherself had taught her, that she was to elevate herself if possible,and that her claims were great to a high worldly establishment?--IfHarriet, from being humble, were grown vain, it was her doing too.CHAPTER XIITill now that she was threatened with its loss, Emma had never knownhow much of her happiness depended on being _first_ with Mr. Knightley,first in interest and affection.--Satisfied that it was so, and feelingit her due, she had enjoyed it without reflection; and only in thedread of being supplanted, found how inexpressibly important it hadbeen.--Long, very long, she felt she had been first; for, having nofemale connexions of his own, there had been only Isabella whose claimscould be compared with hers, and she had always known exactly how farhe loved and esteemed Isabella. She had herself been first with him formany years past. She had not deserved it; she had often been negligentor perverse, slighting his advice, or even wilfully opposing him,insensible of half his merits, and quarrelling with him because he wouldnot acknowledge her false and insolent estimate of her own--but still,from family attachment and habit, and thorough excellence of mind, hehad loved her, and watched over her from a girl, with an endeavour toimprove her, and an anxiety for her doing right, which no other creaturehad at all shared. In spite of all her faults, she knew she was dearto him; might she not say, very dear?--When the suggestions of hope,however, which must follow here, presented themselves, she could notpresume to indulge them. Harriet Smith might think herself not unworthyof being peculiarly, exclusively, passionately loved by Mr. Knightley._She_ could not. She could not flatter herself with any idea ofblindness in his attachment to _her_. She had received a very recentproof of its impartiality.--How shocked had he been by her behaviour toMiss Bates! How directly, how strongly had he expressed himself to heron the subject!--Not too strongly for the offence--but far, far toostrongly to issue from any feeling softer than upright justice andclear-sighted goodwill.--She had no hope, nothing to deserve the nameof hope, that he could have that sort of affection for herself which wasnow in question; but there was a hope (at times a slight one, attimes much stronger,) that Harriet might have deceived herself, and beoverrating his regard for _her_.--Wish it she must, for his sake--be theconsequence nothing to herself, but his remaining single all his life.Could she be secure of that, indeed, of his never marrying at all, shebelieved she should be perfectly satisfied.--Let him but continue thesame Mr. Knightley to her and her father, the same Mr. Knightley toall the world; let Donwell and Hartfield lose none of their preciousintercourse of friendship and confidence, and her peace would befully secured.--Marriage, in fact, would not do for her. It would beincompatible with what she owed to her father, and with what she feltfor him. Nothing should separate her from her father. She would notmarry, even if she were asked by Mr. Knightley.It must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be disappointed; and shehoped, that when able to see them together again, she might at leastbe able to ascertain what the chances for it were.--She should see themhenceforward with the closest observance; and wretchedly as she hadhitherto misunderstood even those she was watching, she did not know howto admit that she could be blinded here.--He was expected back everyday. The power of observation would be soon given--frightfully soon itappeared when her thoughts were in one course. In the meanwhile, sheresolved against seeing Harriet.--It would do neither of them good,it would do the subject no good, to be talking of it farther.--She wasresolved not to be convinced, as long as she could doubt, and yet hadno authority for opposing Harriet's confidence. To talk would be only toirritate.--She wrote to her, therefore, kindly, but decisively, to begthat she would not, at present, come to Hartfield; acknowledging it tobe her conviction, that all farther confidential discussion of _one_topic had better be avoided; and hoping, that if a few days were allowedto pass before they met again, except in the company of others--sheobjected only to a tete-a-tete--they might be able to act as if theyhad forgotten the conversation of yesterday.--Harriet submitted, andapproved, and was grateful.This point was just arranged, when a visitor arrived to tear Emma'sthoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed them,sleeping or waking, the last twenty-four hours--Mrs. Weston, who hadbeen calling on her daughter-in-law elect, and took Hartfield in herway home, almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself, torelate all the particulars of so interesting an interview.Mr. Weston had accompanied her to Mrs. Bates's, and gone through hisshare of this essential attention most handsomely; but she having theninduced Miss Fairfax to join her in an airing, was now returned withmuch more to say, and much more to say with satisfaction, than a quarterof an hour spent in Mrs. Bates's parlour, with all the encumbrance ofawkward feelings, could have afforded.A little curiosity Emma had; and she made the most of it while herfriend related. Mrs. Weston had set off to pay the visit in a good dealof agitation herself; and in the first place had wished not to go at allat present, to be allowed merely to write to Miss Fairfax instead, andto defer this ceremonious call till a little time had passed, and Mr.Churchill could be reconciled to the engagement's becoming known; as,considering every thing, she thought such a visit could not be paidwithout leading to reports:--but Mr. Weston had thought differently; hewas extremely anxious to shew his approbation to Miss Fairfax and herfamily, and did not conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it;or if it were, that it would be of any consequence; for "such things,"he observed, "always got about]
 [ Emma smiled, and felt that Mr. Westonhad very good reason for saying so. They had gone, in short--and verygreat had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady. She hadhardly been able to speak a word, and every look and action had shewnhow deeply she was suffering from consciousness. The quiet, heart-feltsatisfaction of the old lady, and the rapturous delight of herdaughter--who proved even too joyous to talk as usual, had been agratifying, yet almost an affecting, scene. They were both so trulyrespectable in their happiness, so disinterested in every sensation;thought so much of Jane; so much of every body, and so little ofthemselves, that every kindly feeling was at work for them. MissFairfax's recent illness had offered a fair plea for Mrs. Weston toinvite her to an airing; she had drawn back and declined at first, but,on being pressed had yielded; and, in the course of their drive,Mrs. Weston had, by gentle encouragement, overcome so much of herembarrassment, as to bring her to converse on the important subject.Apologies for her seemingly ungracious silence in their first reception,and the warmest expressions of the gratitude she was always feelingtowards herself and Mr. Weston, must necessarily open the cause; butwhen these effusions were put by, they had talked a good deal of thepresent and of the future state of the engagement. Mrs. Weston wasconvinced that such conversation must be the greatest relief to hercompanion, pent up within her own mind as every thing had so long been,and was very much pleased with all that she had said on the subject]
 [On the misery of what she had suffered, during the concealment of somany months," continued Mrs. Weston, "she was energetic. This was oneof her expressions. 'I will not say, that since I entered into theengagement I have not had some happy moments; but I can say, that I havenever known the blessing of one tranquil hour:'--and the quivering lip,Emma, which uttered it, was an attestation that I felt at my heart]
 ["Poor girl!" said Emma. "She thinks herself wrong, then, for havingconsented to a private engagement?""Wrong! No one, I believe, can blame her more than she is disposedto blame herself. 'The consequence,' said she, 'has been a state ofperpetual suffering to me; and so it ought. But after all the punishmentthat misconduct can bring, it is still not less misconduct. Pain is noexpiation. I never can be blameless. I have been acting contrary to allmy sense of right; and the fortunate turn that every thing has taken,and the kindness I am now receiving, is what my conscience tells meought not to be]
 [ 'Do not imagine, madam,' she continued, 'that I wastaught wrong. Do not let any reflection fall on the principles or thecare of the friends who brought me up. The error has been all my own;and I do assure you that, with all the excuse that present circumstancesmay appear to give, I shall yet dread making the story known to ColonelCampbell]
 [""Poor girl!" said Emma again. "She loves him then excessively, Isuppose. It must have been from attachment only, that she could beled to form the engagement. Her affection must have overpowered herjudgment]
 ["Yes, I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him]
 ["I am afraid," returned Emma, sighing, "that I must often havecontributed to make her unhappy]
 ["On your side, my love, it was very innocently done. But sheprobably had something of that in her thoughts, when alluding to themisunderstandings which he had given us hints of before. One naturalconsequence of the evil she had involved herself in," she said, "wasthat of making her _unreasonable_. The consciousness of having doneamiss, had exposed her to a thousand inquietudes, and made her captiousand irritable to a degree that must have been--that had been--hard forhim to bear. 'I did not make the allowances,' said she, 'which I oughtto have done, for his temper and spirits--his delightful spirits, andthat gaiety, that playfulness of disposition, which, under any othercircumstances, would, I am sure, have been as constantly bewitching tome, as they were at first]
 [ She then began to speak of you, and of thegreat kindness you had shewn her during her illness; and with a blushwhich shewed me how it was all connected, desired me, whenever I hadan opportunity, to thank you--I could not thank you too much--for everywish and every endeavour to do her good. She was sensible that you hadnever received any proper acknowledgment from herself]
 ["If I did not know her to be happy now," said Emma, seriously, "which,in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulous conscience, shemust be, I could not bear these thanks;--for, oh! Mrs. Weston, if therewere an account drawn up of the evil and the good I have done MissFairfax!--Well (checking herself, and trying to be more lively), thisis all to be forgotten. You are very kind to bring me these interestingparticulars. They shew her to the greatest advantage. I am sure she isvery good--I hope she will be very happy. It is fit that the fortuneshould be on his side, for I think the merit will be all on hers]
 [Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs. Weston. She thoughtwell of Frank in almost every respect; and, what was more, she loved himvery much, and her defence was, therefore, earnest. She talked with agreat deal of reason, and at least equal affection--but she had too muchto urge for Emma's attention; it was soon gone to Brunswick Square orto Donwell; she forgot to attempt to listen; and when Mrs. Weston endedwith, "We have not yet had the letter we are so anxious for, you know,but I hope it will soon come," she was obliged to pause before sheanswered, and at last obliged to answer at random, before she could atall recollect what letter it was which they were so anxious for]
 [Are you well, my Emma?" was Mrs. Weston's parting question]
 [Oh! perfectly. I am always well, you know. Be sure to give meintelligence of the letter as soon as possible]
 [Mrs. Weston's communications furnished Emma with more food forunpleasant reflection, by increasing her esteem and compassion, and hersense of past injustice towards Miss Fairfax. She bitterly regrettednot having sought a closer acquaintance with her, and blushed for theenvious feelings which had certainly been, in some measure, the cause.Had she followed Mr. Knightley's known wishes, in paying that attentionto Miss Fairfax, which was every way her due; had she tried to know herbetter; had she done her part towards intimacy; had she endeavouredto find a friend there instead of in Harriet Smith; she must, in allprobability, have been spared from every pain which pressed on hernow.--Birth, abilities, and education, had been equally marking one asan associate for her, to be received with gratitude; and the other--whatwas she?--Supposing even that they had never become intimate friends;that she had never been admitted into Miss Fairfax's confidence on thisimportant matter--which was most probable--still, in knowing her asshe ought, and as she might, she must have been preserved from theabominable suspicions of an improper attachment to Mr. Dixon, which shehad not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured herself, but had sounpardonably imparted; an idea which she greatly feared had been made asubject of material distress to the delicacy of Jane's feelings, by thelevity or carelessness of Frank Churchill's. Of all the sources of evilsurrounding the former, since her coming to Highbury, she was persuadedthat she must herself have been the worst. She must have been aperpetual enemy. They never could have been all three together, withouther having stabbed Jane Fairfax's peace in a thousand instances; and onBox Hill, perhaps, it had been the agony of a mind that would bear nomore.The evening of this day was very long, and melancholy, at Hartfield.The weather added what it could of gloom. A cold stormy rain set in, andnothing of July appeared but in the trees and shrubs, which the wind wasdespoiling, and the length of the day, which only made such cruel sightsthe longer visible.The weather affected Mr. Woodhouse, and he could only be kept tolerablycomfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter's side, and byexertions which had never cost her half so much before. It remindedher of their first forlorn tete-a-tete, on the evening of Mrs. Weston'swedding-day; but Mr. Knightley had walked in then, soon after tea,and dissipated every melancholy fancy. Alas! such delightful proofs ofHartfield's attraction, as those sort of visits conveyed, might shortlybe over. The picture which she had then drawn of the privations of theapproaching winter, had proved erroneous; no friends had deserted them,no pleasures had been lost.--But her present forebodings she fearedwould experience no similar contradiction. The prospect before her now,was threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled--thatmight not be even partially brightened. If all took place thatmight take place among the circle of her friends, Hartfield must becomparatively deserted; and she left to cheer her father with thespirits only of ruined happiness.The child to be born at Randalls must be a tie there even dearer thanherself; and Mrs. Weston's heart and time would be occupied by it.They should lose her; and, probably, in great measure, her husbandalso.--Frank Churchill would return among them no more; and MissFairfax, it was reasonable to suppose, would soon cease to belong toHighbury. They would be married, and settled either at or near Enscombe.All that were good would be withdrawn; and if to these losses, theloss of Donwell were to be added, what would remain of cheerful orof rational society within their reach? Mr. Knightley to be no longercoming there for his evening comfort!--No longer walking in at allhours, as if ever willing to change his own home for their's!--How wasit to be endured? And if he were to be lost to them for Harriet's sake;if he were to be thought of hereafter, as finding in Harriet's societyall that he wanted; if Harriet were to be the chosen, the first,the dearest, the friend, the wife to whom he looked for all the bestblessings of existence; what could be increasing Emma's wretchedness butthe reflection never far distant from her mind, that it had been all herown work?When it came to such a pitch as this, she was not able to refrain froma start, or a heavy sigh, or even from walking about the room for afew seconds--and the only source whence any thing like consolationor composure could be drawn, was in the resolution of her own betterconduct, and the hope that, however inferior in spirit and gaiety mightbe the following and every future winter of her life to the past, itwould yet find her more rational, more acquainted with herself, andleave her less to regret when it were gone.CHAPTER XIIIThe weather continued much the same all the following morning; andthe same loneliness, and the same melancholy, seemed to reign atHartfield--but in the afternoon it cleared; the wind changed into asofter quarter; the clouds were carried off; the sun appeared; it wassummer again. With all the eagerness which such a transition gives, Emmaresolved to be out of doors as soon as possible. Never had the exquisitesight, smell, sensation of nature, tranquil, warm, and brilliant aftera storm, been more attractive to her. She longed for the serenity theymight gradually introduce; and on Mr. Perry's coming in soon afterdinner, with a disengaged hour to give her father, she lost no timein hurrying into the shrubbery.--There, with spirits freshened, andthoughts a little relieved, she had taken a few turns, when she saw Mr.Knightley passing through the garden door, and coming towards her.--Itwas the first intimation of his being returned from London. She hadbeen thinking of him the moment before, as unquestionably sixteen milesdistant.--There was time only for the quickest arrangement of mind. Shemust be collected and calm. In half a minute they were together. The"How d'ye do's" were quiet and constrained on each side. She asked aftertheir mutual friends; they were all well.--When had he left them?--Onlythat morning. He must have had a wet ride.--Yes.--He meant to walk withher, she found. "He had just looked into the dining-room, and as he wasnot wanted there, preferred being out of doors]
 [--She thought he neitherlooked nor spoke cheerfully; and the first possible cause for it,suggested by her fears, was, that he had perhaps been communicating hisplans to his brother, and was pained by the manner in which they hadbeen received.They walked together. He was silent. She thought he was often lookingat her, and trying for a fuller view of her face than it suited her togive. And this belief produced another dread. Perhaps he wanted tospeak to her, of his attachment to Harriet; he might be watching forencouragement to begin.--She did not, could not, feel equal to lead theway to any such subject. He must do it all himself. Yet she couldnot bear this silence. With him it was most unnatural. Sheconsidered--resolved--and, trying to smile, began--"You have some news to hear, now you are come back, that will rathersurprize you]
 ["Have I?" said he quietly, and looking at her; "of what nature?""Oh! the best nature in the world--a wedding]
 [After waiting a moment, as if to be sure she intended to say no more, hereplied,"If you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill, I have heard thatalready]
 ["How is it possible?" cried Emma, turning her glowing cheeks towardshim; for, while she spoke, it occurred to her that he might have calledat Mrs. Goddard's in his way]
 [I had a few lines on parish business from Mr. Weston this morning, andat the end of them he gave me a brief account of what had happened]
 [Emma was quite relieved, and could presently say, with a little morecomposure,"_You_ probably have been less surprized than any of us, for you havehad your suspicions.--I have not forgotten that you once tried to giveme a caution.--I wish I had attended to it--but--(with a sinking voiceand a heavy sigh) I seem to have been doomed to blindness]
 [For a moment or two nothing was said, and she was unsuspicious of havingexcited any particular interest, till she found her arm drawn withinhis, and pressed against his heart, and heard him thus saying, in a toneof great sensibility, speaking low,"Time, my dearest Emma, time will heal the wound.--Your own excellentsense--your exertions for your father's sake--I know you will not allowyourself--]
 [ Her arm was pressed again, as he added, in a morebroken and subdued accent, "The feelings of the warmestfriendship--Indignation--Abominable scoundrel!"--And in a louder,steadier tone, he concluded with, "He will soon be gone. They will soonbe in Yorkshire. I am sorry for _her_. She deserves a better fate]
 [Emma understood him; and as soon as she could recover from the flutterof pleasure, excited by such tender consideration, replied,"You are very kind--but you are mistaken--and I must set you right.--I am not in want of that sort of compassion. My blindness to what wasgoing on, led me to act by them in a way that I must always be ashamedof, and I was very foolishly tempted to say and do many things which maywell lay me open to unpleasant conjectures, but I have no other reasonto regret that I was not in the secret earlier]
 ["Emma!" cried he, looking eagerly at her, "are you, indeed?"--butchecking himself--"No, no, I understand you--forgive me--I am pleasedthat you can say even so much.--He is no object of regret, indeed! andit will not be very long, I hope, before that becomes the acknowledgmentof more than your reason.--Fortunate that your affections were notfarther entangled!--I could never, I confess, from your manners, assuremyself as to the degree of what you felt--I could only be certain thatthere was a preference--and a preference which I never believed him todeserve.--He is a disgrace to the name of man.--And is he to be rewardedwith that sweet young woman?--Jane, Jane, you will be a miserablecreature]
 ["Mr. Knightley," said Emma, trying to be lively, but really confused--"Iam in a very extraordinary situation. I cannot let you continue in yourerror; and yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression, Ihave as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have beenat all attached to the person we are speaking of, as it might be naturalfor a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse.--But I neverhave]
 [He listened in perfect silence. She wished him to speak, but he wouldnot. She supposed she must say more before she were entitled to hisclemency; but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lower herself inhis opinion. She went on, however]
 [I have very little to say for my own conduct.--I was tempted by hisattentions, and allowed myself to appear pleased.--An old story,probably--a common case--and no more than has happened to hundreds of mysex before; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who sets upas I do for Understanding. Many circumstances assisted the temptation.He was the son of Mr. Weston--he was continually here--I always foundhim very pleasant--and, in short, for (with a sigh) let me swell out thecauses ever so ingeniously, they all centre in this at last--my vanitywas flattered, and I allowed his attentions. Latterly, however--for sometime, indeed--I have had no idea of their meaning any thing.--I thoughtthem a habit, a trick, nothing that called for seriousness on my side.He has imposed on me, but he has not injured me. I have never beenattached to him. And now I can tolerably comprehend his behaviour. Henever wished to attach me. It was merely a blind to conceal his realsituation with another.--It was his object to blind all about him; andno one, I am sure, could be more effectually blinded than myself--exceptthat I was _not_ blinded--that it was my good fortune--that, in short, Iwas somehow or other safe from him]
 [She had hoped for an answer here--for a few words to say that herconduct was at least intelligible; but he was silent; and, as far as shecould judge, deep in thought. At last, and tolerably in his usual tone,he said,"I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill.--I can suppose,however, that I may have underrated him. My acquaintance with him hasbeen but trifling.--And even if I have not underrated him hitherto, hemay yet turn out well.--With such a woman he has a chance.--I have nomotive for wishing him ill--and for her sake, whose happiness will beinvolved in his good character and conduct, I shall certainly wish himwell]
 ["I have no doubt of their being happy together," said Emma; "I believethem to be very mutually and very sincerely attached]
 ["He is a most fortunate man!" returned Mr. Knightley, with energy. "Soearly in life--at three-and-twenty--a period when, if a man chuses awife, he generally chuses ill. At three-and-twenty to have drawn sucha prize! What years of felicity that man, in all human calculation,has before him!--Assured of the love of such a woman--the disinterestedlove, for Jane Fairfax's character vouches for her disinterestedness;every thing in his favour,--equality of situation--I mean, as far asregards society, and all the habits and manners that are important;equality in every point but one--and that one, since the purity of herheart is not to be doubted, such as must increase his felicity, for itwill be his to bestow the only advantages she wants.--A man would alwayswish to give a woman a better home than the one he takes her from;and he who can do it, where there is no doubt of _her_ regard, must,I think, be the happiest of mortals.--Frank Churchill is, indeed, thefavourite of fortune. Every thing turns out for his good.--He meetswith a young woman at a watering-place, gains her affection, cannot evenweary her by negligent treatment--and had he and all his family soughtround the world for a perfect wife for him, they could not have foundher superior.--His aunt is in the way.--His aunt dies.--He has only tospeak.--His friends are eager to promote his happiness.--He had usedevery body ill--and they are all delighted to forgive him.--He is afortunate man indeed!""You speak as if you envied him]
 ["And I do envy him, Emma. In one respect he is the object of my envy]
 [Emma could say no more. They seemed to be within half a sentenceof Harriet, and her immediate feeling was to avert the subject, ifpossible. She made her plan; she would speak of something totallydifferent--the children in Brunswick Square; and she only waited forbreath to begin, when Mr. Knightley startled her, by saying,"You will not ask me what is the point of envy.--You are determined, Isee, to have no curiosity.--You are wise--but _I_ cannot be wise. Emma,I must tell you what you will not ask, though I may wish it unsaid thenext moment]
 ["Oh! then, don't speak it, don't speak it," she eagerly cried. "Take alittle time, consider, do not commit yourself]
 ["Thank you," said he, in an accent of deep mortification, and notanother syllable followed.Emma could not bear to give him pain. He was wishing to confide inher--perhaps to consult her;--cost her what it would, she would listen.She might assist his resolution, or reconcile him to it; she might givejust praise to Harriet, or, by representing to him his own independence,relieve him from that state of indecision, which must be moreintolerable than any alternative to such a mind as his.--They hadreached the house]
 [You are going in, I suppose?" said he]
 [No,"--replied Emma--quite confirmed by the depressed manner in whichhe still spoke--"I should like to take another turn. Mr. Perry is notgone]
 [ And, after proceeding a few steps, she added--"I stopped youungraciously, just now, Mr. Knightley, and, I am afraid, gave youpain.--But if you have any wish to speak openly to me as a friend, orto ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation--asa friend, indeed, you may command me.--I will hear whatever you like. Iwill tell you exactly what I think]
 ["As a friend!"--repeated Mr. Knightley.--"Emma, that I fear is aword--No, I have no wish--Stay, yes, why should I hesitate?--Ihave gone too far already for concealment.--Emma, I accept youroffer--Extraordinary as it may seem, I accept it, and refer myself toyou as a friend.--Tell me, then, have I no chance of ever succeeding?"He stopped in his earnestness to look the question, and the expressionof his eyes overpowered her]
 [My dearest Emma," said he, "for dearest you will always be, whateverthe event of this hour's conversation, my dearest, most belovedEmma--tell me at once. Say 'No,' if it is to be said]
 [--She couldreally say nothing.--"You are silent," he cried, with great animation;"absolutely silent! at present I ask no more]
 [Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment. Thedread of being awakened from the happiest dream, was perhaps the mostprominent feeling]
 [I cannot make speeches, Emma:" he soon resumed; and in a tone ofsuch sincere, decided, intelligible tenderness as was tolerablyconvincing.--"If I loved you less, I might be able to talk about itmore. But you know what I am.--You hear nothing but truth from me.--Ihave blamed you, and lectured you, and you have borne it as no otherwoman in England would have borne it.--Bear with the truths I wouldtell you now, dearest Emma, as well as you have borne with them. Themanner, perhaps, may have as little to recommend them. God knows, I havebeen a very indifferent lover.--But you understand me.--Yes, you see,you understand my feelings--and will return them if you can. At present,I ask only to hear, once to hear your voice]
 [While he spoke, Emma's mind was most busy, and, with all the wonderfulvelocity of thought, had been able--and yet without losing a word--tocatch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole; to see that Harriet'shopes had been entirely groundless, a mistake, a delusion, as complete adelusion as any of her own--that Harriet was nothing; that she was everything herself; that what she had been saying relative to Harriethad been all taken as the language of her own feelings; and that heragitation, her doubts, her reluctance, her discouragement, had been allreceived as discouragement from herself.--And not only was there timefor these convictions, with all their glow of attendant happiness; therewas time also to rejoice that Harriet's secret had not escaped her, andto resolve that it need not, and should not.--It was all the serviceshe could now render her poor friend; for as to any of that heroism ofsentiment which might have prompted her to entreat him to transfer hisaffection from herself to Harriet, as infinitely the most worthy of thetwo--or even the more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse him atonce and for ever, without vouchsafing any motive, because he could notmarry them both, Emma had it not. She felt for Harriet, with pain andwith contrition; but no flight of generosity run mad, opposing all thatcould be probable or reasonable, entered her brain. She had led herfriend astray, and it would be a reproach to her for ever; but herjudgment was as strong as her feelings, and as strong as it had everbeen before, in reprobating any such alliance for him, as most unequaland degrading. Her way was clear, though not quite smooth.--She spokethen, on being so entreated.--What did she say?--Just what she ought,of course. A lady always does.--She said enough to shew there need notbe despair--and to invite him to say more himself. He _had_ despaired atone period; he had received such an injunction to caution and silence,as for the time crushed every hope;--she had begun by refusing to hearhim.--The change had perhaps been somewhat sudden;--her proposal oftaking another turn, her renewing the conversation which she hadjust put an end to, might be a little extraordinary!--She felt itsinconsistency; but Mr. Knightley was so obliging as to put up with it,and seek no farther explanation.Seldom, very seldom, does complete truth belong to any human disclosure;seldom can it happen that something is not a little disguised, or alittle mistaken; but where, as in this case, though the conduct ismistaken, the feelings are not, it may not be very material.--Mr.Knightley could not impute to Emma a more relenting heart than shepossessed, or a heart more disposed to accept of his.He had, in fact, been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence. He hadfollowed her into the shrubbery with no idea of trying it. He had come,in his anxiety to see how she bore Frank Churchill's engagement, with noselfish view, no view at all, but of endeavouring, if she allowed him anopening, to soothe or to counsel her.--The rest had been the work ofthe moment, the immediate effect of what he heard, on his feelings. Thedelightful assurance of her total indifference towards Frank Churchill,of her having a heart completely disengaged from him, had given birthto the hope, that, in time, he might gain her affection himself;--butit had been no present hope--he had only, in the momentary conquest ofeagerness over judgment, aspired to be told that she did not forbid hisattempt to attach her.--The superior hopes which gradually opened wereso much the more enchanting.--The affection, which he had been askingto be allowed to create, if he could, was already his!--Within halfan hour, he had passed from a thoroughly distressed state of mind, tosomething so like perfect happiness, that it could bear no other name._Her_ change was equal.--This one half-hour had given to each the sameprecious certainty of being beloved, had cleared from each the samedegree of ignorance, jealousy, or distrust.--On his side, there had beena long-standing jealousy, old as the arrival, or even the expectation,of Frank Churchill.--He had been in love with Emma, and jealous of FrankChurchill, from about the same period, one sentiment having probablyenlightened him as to the other. It was his jealousy of Frank Churchillthat had taken him from the country.--The Box Hill party had decidedhim on going away. He would save himself from witnessing againsuch permitted, encouraged attentions.--He had gone to learn to beindifferent.--But he had gone to a wrong place. There was too muchdomestic happiness in his brother's house; woman wore too amiable a formin it; Isabella was too much like Emma--differing only in those strikinginferiorities, which always brought the other in brilliancy beforehim, for much to have been done, even had his time been longer.--He hadstayed on, however, vigorously, day after day--till this very morning'spost had conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax.--Then, with the gladnesswhich must be felt, nay, which he did not scruple to feel, having neverbelieved Frank Churchill to be at all deserving Emma, was there so muchfond solicitude, so much keen anxiety for her, that he could stay nolonger. He had ridden home through the rain; and had walked up directlyafter dinner, to see how this sweetest and best of all creatures,faultless in spite of all her faults, bore the discovery.He had found her agitated and low.--Frank Churchill was a villain.--He heard her declare that she had never loved him. Frank Churchill'scharacter was not desperate.--She was his own Emma, by hand and word,when they returned into the house; and if he could have thought of FrankChurchill then, he might have deemed him a very good sort of fellow.CHAPTER XIVWhat totally different feelings did Emma take back into the house fromwhat she had brought out!--she had then been only daring to hope fora little respite of suffering;--she was now in an exquisite flutter ofhappiness, and such happiness moreover as she believed must still begreater when the flutter should have passed away.They sat down to tea--the same party round the same table--how oftenit had been collected!--and how often had her eyes fallen on the sameshrubs in the lawn, and observed the same beautiful effect of thewestern sun!--But never in such a state of spirits, never in any thinglike it; and it was with difficulty that she could summon enough of herusual self to be the attentive lady of the house, or even the attentivedaughter.Poor Mr. Woodhouse little suspected what was plotting against him in thebreast of that man whom he was so cordially welcoming, and so anxiouslyhoping might not have taken cold from his ride.--Could he have seen theheart, he would have cared very little for the lungs; but without themost distant imagination of the impending evil, without the slightestperception of any thing extraordinary in the looks or ways of either,he repeated to them very comfortably all the articles of news he hadreceived from Mr. Perry, and talked on with much self-contentment,totally unsuspicious of what they could have told him in return.As long as Mr. Knightley remained with them, Emma's fever continued;but when he was gone, she began to be a little tranquillised andsubdued--and in the course of the sleepless night, which was the taxfor such an evening, she found one or two such very serious pointsto consider, as made her feel, that even her happiness must have somealloy. Her father--and Harriet. She could not be alone without feelingthe full weight of their separate claims; and how to guard the comfortof both to the utmost, was the question. With respect to her father,it was a question soon answered. She hardly knew yet what Mr. Knightleywould ask; but a very short parley with her own heart produced the mostsolemn resolution of never quitting her father.--She even wept overthe idea of it, as a sin of thought. While he lived, it must be only anengagement; but she flattered herself, that if divested of the danger ofdrawing her away, it might become an increase of comfort to him.--Howto do her best by Harriet, was of more difficult decision;--how to spareher from any unnecessary pain; how to make her any possible atonement;how to appear least her enemy?--On these subjects, her perplexityand distress were very great--and her mind had to pass again andagain through every bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had eversurrounded it.--She could only resolve at last, that she would stillavoid a meeting with her, and communicate all that need be told byletter; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to have her removedjust now for a time from Highbury, and--indulging in one schememore--nearly resolve, that it might be practicable to get an invitationfor her to Brunswick Square.--Isabella had been pleased with Harriet;and a few weeks spent in London must give her some amusement.--She didnot think it in Harriet's nature to escape being benefited by noveltyand variety, by the streets, the shops, and the children.--At any rate,it would be a proof of attention and kindness in herself, from whomevery thing was due; a separation for the present; an averting of theevil day, when they must all be together again.She rose early, and wrote her letter to Harriet; an employment whichleft her so very serious, so nearly sad, that Mr. Knightley, in walkingup to Hartfield to breakfast, did not arrive at all too soon; and halfan hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground again with him,literally and figuratively, was quite necessary to reinstate her in aproper share of the happiness of the evening before.He had not left her long, by no means long enough for her to have theslightest inclination for thinking of any body else, when a letter wasbrought her from Randalls--a very thick letter;--she guessed what itmust contain, and deprecated the necessity of reading it.--She was nowin perfect charity with Frank Churchill; she wanted no explanations, shewanted only to have her thoughts to herself--and as for understandingany thing he wrote, she was sure she was incapable of it.--It must bewaded through, however. She opened the packet; it was too surely so;--anote from Mrs. Weston to herself, ushered in the letter from Frank toMrs. Weston]
 [I have the greatest pleasure, my dear Emma, in forwarding to you theenclosed. I know what thorough justice you will do it, and have scarcelya doubt of its happy effect.--I think we shall never materially disagreeabout the writer again; but I will not delay you by a long preface.--Weare quite well.--This letter has been the cure of all the littlenervousness I have been feeling lately.--I did not quite like your lookson Tuesday, but it was an ungenial morning; and though you will neverown being affected by weather, I think every body feels a north-eastwind.--I felt for your dear father very much in the storm of Tuesdayafternoon and yesterday morning, but had the comfort of hearing lastnight, by Mr. Perry, that it had not made him ill]
 [                            "Yours ever,                                                       "A. W]
 [                       [To Mrs. Weston]
 [                                                       WINDSOR-JULY.MY DEAR MADAM,"If I made myself intelligible yesterday, this letter will beexpected; but expected or not, I know it will be read with candour andindulgence.--You are all goodness, and I believe there will be need ofeven all your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct.--ButI have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent. My couragerises while I write. It is very difficult for the prosperous to behumble. I have already met with such success in two applications forpardon, that I may be in danger of thinking myself too sure of yours,and of those among your friends who have had any ground of offence.--Youmust all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situation when Ifirst arrived at Randalls; you must consider me as having a secret whichwas to be kept at all hazards. This was the fact. My right to placemyself in a situation requiring such concealment, is another question.I shall not discuss it here. For my temptation to _think_ it a right,I refer every caviller to a brick house, sashed windows below, andcasements above, in Highbury. I dared not address her openly; mydifficulties in the then state of Enscombe must be too well known torequire definition; and I was fortunate enough to prevail, before weparted at Weymouth, and to induce the most upright female mind in thecreation to stoop in charity to a secret engagement.--Had she refused, Ishould have gone mad.--But you will be ready to say, what was yourhope in doing this?--What did you look forward to?--To any thing, everything--to time, chance, circumstance, slow effects, sudden bursts,perseverance and weariness, health and sickness. Every possibility ofgood was before me, and the first of blessings secured, in obtaining herpromises of faith and correspondence. If you need farther explanation,I have the honour, my dear madam, of being your husband's son, andthe advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope for good, which noinheritance of houses or lands can ever equal the value of.--Seeme, then, under these circumstances, arriving on my first visit toRandalls;--and here I am conscious of wrong, for that visit might havebeen sooner paid. You will look back and see that I did not come tillMiss Fairfax was in Highbury; and as _you_ were the person slighted, youwill forgive me instantly; but I must work on my father's compassion, byreminding him, that so long as I absented myself from his house, so longI lost the blessing of knowing you. My behaviour, during the veryhappy fortnight which I spent with you, did not, I hope, lay me open toreprehension, excepting on one point. And now I come to the principal,the only important part of my conduct while belonging to you, whichexcites my own anxiety, or requires very solicitous explanation. Withthe greatest respect, and the warmest friendship, do I mention MissWoodhouse; my father perhaps will think I ought to add, with the deepesthumiliation.--A few words which dropped from him yesterday spoke hisopinion, and some censure I acknowledge myself liable to.--My behaviourto Miss Woodhouse indicated, I believe, more than it ought.--In order toassist a concealment so essential to me, I was led on to make more thanan allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we were immediatelythrown.--I cannot deny that Miss Woodhouse was my ostensible object--butI am sure you will believe the declaration, that had I not beenconvinced of her indifference, I would not have been induced by anyselfish views to go on.--Amiable and delightful as Miss Woodhouse is,she never gave me the idea of a young woman likely to be attached; andthat she was perfectly free from any tendency to being attached to me,was as much my conviction as my wish.--She received my attentions withan easy, friendly, goodhumoured playfulness, which exactly suited me.We seemed to understand each other. From our relative situation, thoseattentions were her due, and were felt to be so.--Whether Miss Woodhousebegan really to understand me before the expiration of that fortnight,I cannot say;--when I called to take leave of her, I remember that I waswithin a moment of confessing the truth, and I then fancied she was notwithout suspicion; but I have no doubt of her having since detected me,at least in some degree.--She may not have surmised the whole, but herquickness must have penetrated a part. I cannot doubt it. You will find,whenever the subject becomes freed from its present restraints, that itdid not take her wholly by surprize. She frequently gave me hints of it.I remember her telling me at the ball, that I owed Mrs. Elton gratitudefor her attentions to Miss Fairfax.--I hope this history of my conducttowards her will be admitted by you and my father as great extenuationof what you saw amiss. While you considered me as having sinned againstEmma Woodhouse, I could deserve nothing from either. Acquit me here, andprocure for me, when it is allowable, the acquittal and good wishesof that said Emma Woodhouse, whom I regard with so much brotherlyaffection, as to long to have her as deeply and as happily in love asmyself.--Whatever strange things I said or did during that fortnight,you have now a key to. My heart was in Highbury, and my business was toget my body thither as often as might be, and with the least suspicion.If you remember any queernesses, set them all to the right account.--Ofthe pianoforte so much talked of, I feel it only necessary to say, thatits being ordered was absolutely unknown to Miss F--, who would neverhave allowed me to send it, had any choice been given her.--Thedelicacy of her mind throughout the whole engagement, my dear madam,is much beyond my power of doing justice to. You will soon, I earnestlyhope, know her thoroughly yourself.--No description can describe her.She must tell you herself what she is--yet not by word, for neverwas there a human creature who would so designedly suppress her ownmerit.--Since I began this letter, which will be longer than I foresaw,I have heard from her.--She gives a good account of her own health; butas she never complains, I dare not depend. I want to have your opinionof her looks. I know you will soon call on her; she is living in dreadof the visit. Perhaps it is paid already. Let me hear from you withoutdelay; I am impatient for a thousand particulars. Remember how fewminutes I was at Randalls, and in how bewildered, how mad a state: andI am not much better yet; still insane either from happiness ormisery. When I think of the kindness and favour I have met with, of herexcellence and patience, and my uncle's generosity, I am mad with joy:but when I recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her, and how littleI deserve to be forgiven, I am mad with anger. If I could but see heragain!--But I must not propose it yet. My uncle has been too good for meto encroach.--I must still add to this long letter. You have not heardall that you ought to hear. I could not give any connected detailyesterday; but the suddenness, and, in one light, the unseasonablenesswith which the affair burst out, needs explanation; for though the eventof the 26th ult., as you will conclude, immediately opened to me thehappiest prospects, I should not have presumed on such early measures,but from the very particular circumstances, which left me not an hour tolose. I should myself have shrunk from any thing so hasty, and shewould have felt every scruple of mine with multiplied strength andrefinement.--But I had no choice. The hasty engagement she had enteredinto with that woman--Here, my dear madam, I was obliged to leave offabruptly, to recollect and compose myself.--I have been walking overthe country, and am now, I hope, rational enough to make the rest ofmy letter what it ought to be.--It is, in fact, a most mortifyingretrospect for me. I behaved shamefully. And here I can admit, thatmy manners to Miss W., in being unpleasant to Miss F., were highlyblameable. _She_ disapproved them, which ought to have been enough.--Myplea of concealing the truth she did not think sufficient.--She wasdispleased; I thought unreasonably so: I thought her, on a thousandoccasions, unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious: I thought her evencold. But she was always right. If I had followed her judgment, andsubdued my spirits to the level of what she deemed proper, I should haveescaped the greatest unhappiness I have ever known.--We quarrelled.--Do you remember the morning spent at Donwell?--_There_ every littledissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis. I was late;I met her walking home by herself, and wanted to walk with her, but shewould not suffer it. She absolutely refused to allow me, which I thenthought most unreasonable. Now, however, I see nothing in it but a verynatural and consistent degree of discretion. While I, to blind theworld to our engagement, was behaving one hour with objectionableparticularity to another woman, was she to be consenting the next to aproposal which might have made every previous caution useless?--Had webeen met walking together between Donwell and Highbury, the truth musthave been suspected.--I was mad enough, however, to resent.--I doubtedher affection. I doubted it more the next day on Box Hill; when,provoked by such conduct on my side, such shameful, insolent neglectof her, and such apparent devotion to Miss W., as it would have beenimpossible for any woman of sense to endure, she spoke her resentment ina form of words perfectly intelligible to me.--In short, my dearmadam, it was a quarrel blameless on her side, abominable on mine; andI returned the same evening to Richmond, though I might have staid withyou till the next morning, merely because I would be as angry withher as possible. Even then, I was not such a fool as not to mean tobe reconciled in time; but I was the injured person, injured by hercoldness, and I went away determined that she should make the firstadvances.--I shall always congratulate myself that you were not ofthe Box Hill party. Had you witnessed my behaviour there, I can hardlysuppose you would ever have thought well of me again. Its effect uponher appears in the immediate resolution it produced: as soon as shefound I was really gone from Randalls, she closed with the offer of thatofficious Mrs. Elton; the whole system of whose treatment of her, by thebye, has ever filled me with indignation and hatred. I must not quarrelwith a spirit of forbearance which has been so richly extended towardsmyself; but, otherwise, I should loudly protest against the share of itwhich that woman has known.--'Jane,' indeed!--You will observe that Ihave not yet indulged myself in calling her by that name, even to you.Think, then, what I must have endured in hearing it bandied betweenthe Eltons with all the vulgarity of needless repetition, and all theinsolence of imaginary superiority. Have patience with me, I shall soonhave done.--She closed with this offer, resolving to break with meentirely, and wrote the next day to tell me that we never were to meetagain.--_She_ _felt_ _the_ _engagement_ _to_ _be_ _a_ _source_ _of__repentance_ _and_ _misery_ _to_ _each_: _she_ _dissolved_ _it_.--Thisletter reached me on the very morning of my poor aunt's death. Ianswered it within an hour; but from the confusion of my mind, and themultiplicity of business falling on me at once, my answer, instead ofbeing sent with all the many other letters of that day, was locked up inmy writing-desk; and I, trusting that I had written enough, though buta few lines, to satisfy her, remained without any uneasiness.--I wasrather disappointed that I did not hear from her again speedily; but Imade excuses for her, and was too busy, and--may I add?--too cheerfulin my views to be captious.--We removed to Windsor; and twodays afterwards I received a parcel from her, my own letters allreturned!--and a few lines at the same time by the post, stating herextreme surprize at not having had the smallest reply to her last; andadding, that as silence on such a point could not be misconstrued,and as it must be equally desirable to both to have every subordinatearrangement concluded as soon as possible, she now sent me, by a safeconveyance, all my letters, and requested, that if I could not directlycommand hers, so as to send them to Highbury within a week, I wouldforward them after that period to her at--: in short, the full directionto Mr. Smallridge's, near Bristol, stared me in the face. I knew thename, the place, I knew all about it, and instantly saw what she hadbeen doing. It was perfectly accordant with that resolution of characterwhich I knew her to possess; and the secrecy she had maintained, as toany such design in her former letter, was equally descriptive of itsanxious delicacy. For the world would not she have seemed to threatenme.--Imagine the shock; imagine how, till I had actually detected myown blunder, I raved at the blunders of the post.--What was to bedone?--One thing only.--I must speak to my uncle. Without his sanction Icould not hope to be listened to again.--I spoke; circumstances werein my favour; the late event had softened away his pride, and he was,earlier than I could have anticipated, wholly reconciled and complying;and could say at last, poor man! with a deep sigh, that he wished Imight find as much happiness in the marriage state as he had done.--Ifelt that it would be of a different sort.--Are you disposed to pityme for what I must have suffered in opening the cause to him, for mysuspense while all was at stake?--No; do not pity me till I reachedHighbury, and saw how ill I had made her. Do not pity me till I saw herwan, sick looks.--I reached Highbury at the time of day when, from myknowledge of their late breakfast hour, I was certain of a good chanceof finding her alone.--I was not disappointed; and at last I was notdisappointed either in the object of my journey. A great deal of veryreasonable, very just displeasure I had to persuade away. But it isdone; we are reconciled, dearer, much dearer, than ever, and no moment'suneasiness can ever occur between us again. Now, my dear madam, I willrelease you; but I could not conclude before. A thousand and a thousandthanks for all the kindness you have ever shewn me, and ten thousand forthe attentions your heart will dictate towards her.--If you think me ina way to be happier than I deserve, I am quite of your opinion.--MissW. calls me the child of good fortune. I hope she is right.--In onerespect, my good fortune is undoubted, that of being able to subscribemyself,                    Your obliged and affectionate Son,                                          F. C. WESTON CHURCHILL.CHAPTER XVThis letter must make its way to Emma's feelings. She was obliged, inspite of her previous determination to the contrary, to do it all thejustice that Mrs. Weston foretold. As soon as she came to her own name,it was irresistible; every line relating to herself was interesting,and almost every line agreeable; and when this charm ceased, the subjectcould still maintain itself, by the natural return of her former regardfor the writer, and the very strong attraction which any picture oflove must have for her at that moment. She never stopt till she had gonethrough the whole; and though it was impossible not to feel that he hadbeen wrong, yet he had been less wrong than she had supposed--and he hadsuffered, and was very sorry--and he was so grateful to Mrs. Weston, andso much in love with Miss Fairfax, and she was so happy herself, thatthere was no being severe; and could he have entered the room, she musthave shaken hands with him as heartily as ever.She thought so well of the letter, that when Mr. Knightley came again,she desired him to read it. She was sure of Mrs. Weston's wishing it tobe communicated; especially to one, who, like Mr. Knightley, had seen somuch to blame in his conduct]
 [I shall be very glad to look it over," said he; "but it seems long. Iwill take it home with me at night]
 [But that would not do. Mr. Weston was to call in the evening, and shemust return it by him]
 [I would rather be talking to you," he replied; "but as it seems amatter of justice, it shall be done]
 [He began--stopping, however, almost directly to say, "Had I been offeredthe sight of one of this gentleman's letters to his mother-in-law a fewmonths ago, Emma, it would not have been taken with such indifference]
 [He proceeded a little farther, reading to himself; and then, with asmile, observed, "Humph! a fine complimentary opening: But it is hisway. One man's style must not be the rule of another's. We will not besevere]
 ["It will be natural for me," he added shortly afterwards, "to speak myopinion aloud as I read. By doing it, I shall feel that I am near you.It will not be so great a loss of time: but if you dislike it--""Not at all. I should wish it]
 [Mr. Knightley returned to his reading with greater alacrity]
 [He trifles here," said he, "as to the temptation. He knows he is wrong,and has nothing rational to urge.--Bad.--He ought not to have formed theengagement.--'His father's disposition:'--he is unjust, however, to hisfather. Mr. Weston's sanguine temper was a blessing on all his uprightand honourable exertions; but Mr. Weston earned every present comfortbefore he endeavoured to gain it.--Very true; he did not come till MissFairfax was here]
 ["And I have not forgotten," said Emma, "how sure you were that he mighthave come sooner if he would. You pass it over very handsomely--but youwere perfectly right]
 ["I was not quite impartial in my judgment, Emma:--but yet, I think--had_you_ not been in the case--I should still have distrusted him]
 [When he came to Miss Woodhouse, he was obliged to read the whole of italoud--all that related to her, with a smile; a look; a shake of thehead; a word or two of assent, or disapprobation; or merely of love, asthe subject required; concluding, however, seriously, and, after steadyreflection, thus--"Very bad--though it might have been worse.--Playing a most dangerousgame. Too much indebted to the event for his acquittal.--No judge ofhis own manners by you.--Always deceived in fact by his own wishes, andregardless of little besides his own convenience.--Fancying you to havefathomed his secret. Natural enough!--his own mind full of intrigue,that he should suspect it in others.--Mystery; Finesse--how they pervertthe understanding! My Emma, does not every thing serve to prove moreand more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with eachother?"Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet's account,which she could not give any sincere explanation of]
 [You had better go on," said she.He did so, but very soon stopt again to say, "the pianoforte! Ah! Thatwas the act of a very, very young man, one too young to consider whetherthe inconvenience of it might not very much exceed the pleasure. Aboyish scheme, indeed!--I cannot comprehend a man's wishing to give awoman any proof of affection which he knows she would rather dispensewith; and he did know that she would have prevented the instrument'scoming if she could]
 [After this, he made some progress without any pause. Frank Churchill'sconfession of having behaved shamefully was the first thing to call formore than a word in passing]
 [I perfectly agree with you, sir,"--was then his remark. "You did behavevery shamefully. You never wrote a truer line]
 [ And having gone throughwhat immediately followed of the basis of their disagreement, and hispersisting to act in direct opposition to Jane Fairfax's sense of right,he made a fuller pause to say, "This is very bad.--He had induced herto place herself, for his sake, in a situation of extreme difficulty anduneasiness, and it should have been his first object to prevent her fromsuffering unnecessarily.--She must have had much more to contendwith, in carrying on the correspondence, than he could. He should haverespected even unreasonable scruples, had there been such; but hers wereall reasonable. We must look to her one fault, and remember that shehad done a wrong thing in consenting to the engagement, to bear that sheshould have been in such a state of punishment]
 [Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box Hill party, and grewuncomfortable. Her own behaviour had been so very improper! She wasdeeply ashamed, and a little afraid of his next look. It was all read,however, steadily, attentively, and without the smallest remark; and,excepting one momentary glance at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fearof giving pain--no remembrance of Box Hill seemed to exist]
 [There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends, theEltons," was his next observation.--"His feelings are natural.--What!actually resolve to break with him entirely!--She felt the engagement tobe a source of repentance and misery to each--she dissolved it.--What aview this gives of her sense of his behaviour!--Well, he must be a mostextraordinary--""Nay, nay, read on.--You will find how very much he suffers]
 ["I hope he does," replied Mr. Knightley coolly, and resuming the letter]
 ['Smallridge!'--What does this mean? What is all this?""She had engaged to go as governess to Mrs. Smallridge's children--adear friend of Mrs. Elton's--a neighbour of Maple Grove; and, by thebye, I wonder how Mrs. Elton bears the disappointment?""Say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige me to read--not even ofMrs. Elton. Only one page more. I shall soon have done. What a letterthe man writes!""I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him]
 ["Well, there _is_ feeling here.--He does seem to have suffered infinding her ill.--Certainly, I can have no doubt of his being fond ofher. 'Dearer, much dearer than ever]
 [ I hope he may long continue tofeel all the value of such a reconciliation.--He is a very liberalthanker, with his thousands and tens of thousands.--'Happier than Ideserve]
 [ Come, he knows himself there. 'Miss Woodhouse calls me thechild of good fortune]
 [--Those were Miss Woodhouse's words, were they?--And a fine ending--and there is the letter. The child of good fortune!That was your name for him, was it?""You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I am; but stillyou must, at least I hope you must, think the better of him for it. Ihope it does him some service with you]
 ["Yes, certainly it does. He has had great faults, faults ofinconsideration and thoughtlessness; and I am very much of his opinionin thinking him likely to be happier than he deserves: but still as heis, beyond a doubt, really attached to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, itmay be hoped, have the advantage of being constantly with her, I am veryready to believe his character will improve, and acquire from hers thesteadiness and delicacy of principle that it wants. And now, let me talkto you of something else. I have another person's interest at presentso much at heart, that I cannot think any longer about Frank Churchill.Ever since I left you this morning, Emma, my mind has been hard at workon one subject]
 [The subject followed; it was in plain, unaffected, gentlemanlikeEnglish, such as Mr. Knightley used even to the woman he was in lovewith, how to be able to ask her to marry him, without attacking thehappiness of her father. Emma's answer was ready at the first word]
 [While her dear father lived, any change of condition must be impossiblefor her. She could never quit him]
 [ Part only of this answer, however,was admitted. The impossibility of her quitting her father, Mr.Knightley felt as strongly as herself; but the inadmissibility of anyother change, he could not agree to. He had been thinking it over mostdeeply, most intently; he had at first hoped to induce Mr. Woodhouse toremove with her to Donwell; he had wanted to believe it feasible, buthis knowledge of Mr. Woodhouse would not suffer him to deceive himselflong; and now he confessed his persuasion, that such a transplantationwould be a risk of her father's comfort, perhaps even of his life, whichmust not be hazarded. Mr. Woodhouse taken from Hartfield!--No, he feltthat it ought not to be attempted. But the plan which had arisen on thesacrifice of this, he trusted his dearest Emma would not find in anyrespect objectionable; it was, that he should be received at Hartfield;that so long as her father's happiness--in other words, his life--requiredHartfield to continue her home, it should be his likewise.Of their all removing to Donwell, Emma had already had her own passingthoughts. Like him, she had tried the scheme and rejected it; but suchan alternative as this had not occurred to her. She was sensible of allthe affection it evinced. She felt that, in quitting Donwell, he mustbe sacrificing a great deal of independence of hours and habits; thatin living constantly with her father, and in no house of his own, therewould be much, very much, to be borne with. She promised to think of it,and advised him to think of it more; but he was fully convinced, that noreflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject. He hadgiven it, he could assure her, very long and calm consideration; he hadbeen walking away from William Larkins the whole morning, to have histhoughts to himself]
 [Ah! there is one difficulty unprovided for," cried Emma. "I am sureWilliam Larkins will not like it. You must get his consent before youask mine]
 [She promised, however, to think of it; and pretty nearly promised,moreover, to think of it, with the intention of finding it a very goodscheme.It is remarkable, that Emma, in the many, very many, points of view inwhich she was now beginning to consider Donwell Abbey, was neverstruck with any sense of injury to her nephew Henry, whose rights asheir-expectant had formerly been so tenaciously regarded. Think she mustof the possible difference to the poor little boy; and yet she onlygave herself a saucy conscious smile about it, and found amusement indetecting the real cause of that violent dislike of Mr. Knightley'smarrying Jane Fairfax, or any body else, which at the time she hadwholly imputed to the amiable solicitude of the sister and the aunt.This proposal of his, this plan of marrying and continuing atHartfield--the more she contemplated it, the more pleasing it became.His evils seemed to lessen, her own advantages to increase, their mutualgood to outweigh every drawback. Such a companion for herself in theperiods of anxiety and cheerlessness before her!--Such a partner inall those duties and cares to which time must be giving increase ofmelancholy!She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet; but every blessingof her own seemed to involve and advance the sufferings of her friend,who must now be even excluded from Hartfield. The delightful familyparty which Emma was securing for herself, poor Harriet must, in merecharitable caution, be kept at a distance from. She would be a loser inevery way. Emma could not deplore her future absence as any deductionfrom her own enjoyment. In such a party, Harriet would be rather adead weight than otherwise; but for the poor girl herself, it seemed apeculiarly cruel necessity that was to be placing her in such a state ofunmerited punishment.In time, of course, Mr. Knightley would be forgotten, that is,supplanted; but this could not be expected to happen very early. Mr.Knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure;--notlike Mr. Elton. Mr. Knightley, always so kind, so feeling, so trulyconsiderate for every body, would never deserve to be less worshippedthan now; and it really was too much to hope even of Harriet, that shecould be in love with more than _three_ men in one year.CHAPTER XVIIt was a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desirous asherself to avoid a meeting. Their intercourse was painful enough byletter. How much worse, had they been obliged to meet!Harriet expressed herself very much as might be supposed, withoutreproaches, or apparent sense of ill-usage; and yet Emma fancied therewas a something of resentment, a something bordering on it in her style,which increased the desirableness of their being separate.--It might beonly her own consciousness; but it seemed as if an angel only could havebeen quite without resentment under such a stroke.She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella's invitation; and she wasfortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it, without resortingto invention.--There was a tooth amiss. Harriet really wished, andhad wished some time, to consult a dentist. Mrs. John Knightley wasdelighted to be of use; any thing of ill health was a recommendation toher--and though not so fond of a dentist as of a Mr. Wingfield, she wasquite eager to have Harriet under her care.--When it was thus settledon her sister's side, Emma proposed it to her friend, and found hervery persuadable.--Harriet was to go; she was invited for at least afortnight; she was to be conveyed in Mr. Woodhouse's carriage.--It wasall arranged, it was all completed, and Harriet was safe in BrunswickSquare.Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr. Knightley's visits; now she couldtalk, and she could listen with true happiness, unchecked by that senseof injustice, of guilt, of something most painful, which had haunted herwhen remembering how disappointed a heart was near her, how much mightat that moment, and at a little distance, be enduring by the feelingswhich she had led astray herself.The difference of Harriet at Mrs. Goddard's, or in London, made perhapsan unreasonable difference in Emma's sensations; but she could not thinkof her in London without objects of curiosity and employment, which mustbe averting the past, and carrying her out of herself.She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the placein her mind which Harriet had occupied. There was a communication beforeher, one which _she_ only could be competent to make--the confession ofher engagement to her father; but she would have nothing to do with itat present.--She had resolved to defer the disclosure till Mrs. Westonwere safe and well. No additional agitation should be thrown at thisperiod among those she loved--and the evil should not act on herselfby anticipation before the appointed time.--A fortnight, at least, ofleisure and peace of mind, to crown every warmer, but more agitating,delight, should be hers.She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure, to employ half anhour of this holiday of spirits in calling on Miss Fairfax.--She oughtto go--and she was longing to see her; the resemblance of their presentsituations increasing every other motive of goodwill. It would be a_secret_ satisfaction; but the consciousness of a similarity of prospectwould certainly add to the interest with which she should attend to anything Jane might communicate.She went--she had driven once unsuccessfully to the door, but had notbeen into the house since the morning after Box Hill, when poor Jane hadbeen in such distress as had filled her with compassion, though all theworst of her sufferings had been unsuspected.--The fear of being stillunwelcome, determined her, though assured of their being at home, towait in the passage, and send up her name.--She heard Patty announcingit; but no such bustle succeeded as poor Miss Bates had before made sohappily intelligible.--No; she heard nothing but the instant reply of,"Beg her to walk up;"--and a moment afterwards she was met on the stairsby Jane herself, coming eagerly forward, as if no other reception of herwere felt sufficient.--Emma had never seen her look so well, so lovely,so engaging. There was consciousness, animation, and warmth; there wasevery thing which her countenance or manner could ever have wanted.--She came forward with an offered hand; and said, in a low, but veryfeeling tone,"This is most kind, indeed!--Miss Woodhouse, it is impossible for meto express--I hope you will believe--Excuse me for being so entirelywithout words]
 [Emma was gratified, and would soon have shewn no want of words, if thesound of Mrs. Elton's voice from the sitting-room had not checkedher, and made it expedient to compress all her friendly and all hercongratulatory sensations into a very, very earnest shake of the hand.Mrs. Bates and Mrs. Elton were together. Miss Bates was out, whichaccounted for the previous tranquillity. Emma could have wished Mrs.Elton elsewhere; but she was in a humour to have patience with everybody; and as Mrs. Elton met her with unusual graciousness, she hoped therencontre would do them no harm.She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs. Elton's thoughts, andunderstand why she was, like herself, in happy spirits; it was being inMiss Fairfax's confidence, and fancying herself acquainted with what wasstill a secret to other people. Emma saw symptoms of it immediately inthe expression of her face; and while paying her own compliments to Mrs.Bates, and appearing to attend to the good old lady's replies, she sawher with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which shehad apparently been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax, and return it intothe purple and gold reticule by her side, saying, with significant nods,"We can finish this some other time, you know. You and I shall not wantopportunities. And, in fact, you have heard all the essential already. Ionly wanted to prove to you that Mrs. S. admits our apology, and isnot offended. You see how delightfully she writes. Oh! she is a sweetcreature! You would have doated on her, had you gone.--But not a wordmore. Let us be discreet--quite on our good behaviour.--Hush!--Youremember those lines--I forget the poem at this moment:        "For when a lady's in the case,        "You know all other things give place]
 [Now I say, my dear, in _our_ case, for _lady_, read----mum! a word tothe wise.--I am in a fine flow of spirits, an't I? But I want to setyour heart at ease as to Mrs. S.--_My_ representation, you see, hasquite appeased her]
 [And again, on Emma's merely turning her head to look at Mrs. Bates'sknitting, she added, in a half whisper,"I mentioned no _names_, you will observe.--Oh! no; cautious as aminister of state. I managed it extremely well]
 [Emma could not doubt. It was a palpable display, repeated on everypossible occasion. When they had all talked a little while in harmony ofthe weather and Mrs. Weston, she found herself abruptly addressed with,"Do not you think, Miss Woodhouse, our saucy little friend here ischarmingly recovered?--Do not you think her cure does Perry the highestcredit?--(here was a side-glance of great meaning at Jane.) Upon myword, Perry has restored her in a wonderful short time!--Oh! if you hadseen her, as I did, when she was at the worst!"--And when Mrs. Bateswas saying something to Emma, whispered farther, "We do not say a wordof any _assistance_ that Perry might have; not a word of a certain youngphysician from Windsor.--Oh! no; Perry shall have all the credit]
 ["I have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you, Miss Woodhouse," sheshortly afterwards began, "since the party to Box Hill. Very pleasantparty. But yet I think there was something wanting. Things did notseem--that is, there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of some.--Soit appeared to me at least, but I might be mistaken. However, I thinkit answered so far as to tempt one to go again. What say you both to ourcollecting the same party, and exploring to Box Hill again, while thefine weather lasts?--It must be the same party, you know, quite thesame party, not _one_ exception]
 [Soon after this Miss Bates came in, and Emma could not help beingdiverted by the perplexity of her first answer to herself, resulting,she supposed, from doubt of what might be said, and impatience to sayevery thing]
 [Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse, you are all kindness.--It is impossibleto say--Yes, indeed, I quite understand--dearest Jane's prospects--thatis, I do not mean.--But she is charmingly recovered.--How is Mr.Woodhouse?--I am so glad.--Quite out of my power.--Such a happy littlecircle as you find us here.--Yes, indeed.--Charming young man!--thatis--so very friendly; I mean good Mr. Perry!--such attention toJane!"--And from her great, her more than commonly thankful delighttowards Mrs. Elton for being there, Emma guessed that there had been alittle show of resentment towards Jane, from the vicarage quarter,which was now graciously overcome.--After a few whispers, indeed, whichplaced it beyond a guess, Mrs. Elton, speaking louder, said,"Yes, here I am, my good friend; and here I have been so long, thatanywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise; but, the truthis, that I am waiting for my lord and master. He promised to join mehere, and pay his respects to you]
 ["What! are we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr. Elton?--That willbe a favour indeed! for I know gentlemen do not like morning visits, andMr. Elton's time is so engaged]
 ["Upon my word it is, Miss Bates.--He really is engaged from morning tonight.--There is no end of people's coming to him, on some pretence orother.--The magistrates, and overseers, and churchwardens, are alwayswanting his opinion. They seem not able to do any thing withouthim.--'Upon my word, Mr. E.,' I often say, 'rather you than I.--I donot know what would become of my crayons and my instrument, if I hadhalf so many applicants]
 [--Bad enough as it is, for I absolutely neglectthem both to an unpardonable degree.--I believe I have not played a barthis fortnight.--However, he is coming, I assure you: yes, indeed, onpurpose to wait on you all]
 [ And putting up her hand to screen herwords from Emma--"A congratulatory visit, you know.--Oh! yes, quiteindispensable]
 [Miss Bates looked about her, so happily--!"He promised to come to me as soon as he could disengage himselffrom Knightley; but he and Knightley are shut up together in deepconsultation.--Mr. E. is Knightley's right hand]
 [Emma would not have smiled for the world, and only said, "Is Mr. Eltongone on foot to Donwell?--He will have a hot walk]
 ["Oh! no, it is a meeting at the Crown, a regular meeting. Weston andCole will be there too; but one is apt to speak only of those wholead.--I fancy Mr. E. and Knightley have every thing their own way]
 ["Have not you mistaken the day?" said Emma. "I am almost certain thatthe meeting at the Crown is not till to-morrow.--Mr. Knightley was atHartfield yesterday, and spoke of it as for Saturday]
 ["Oh! no, the meeting is certainly to-day," was the abrupt answer, whichdenoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs. Elton's side.--"I dobelieve," she continued, "this is the most troublesome parish that everwas. We never heard of such things at Maple Grove]
 ["Your parish there was small," said Jane]
 [Upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I never heard the subjecttalked of]
 ["But it is proved by the smallness of the school, which I have heardyou speak of, as under the patronage of your sister and Mrs. Bragge; theonly school, and not more than five-and-twenty children]
 ["Ah! you clever creature, that's very true. What a thinking brain youhave! I say, Jane, what a perfect character you and I should make, if wecould be shaken together. My liveliness and your solidity would produceperfection.--Not that I presume to insinuate, however, that _some_people may not think _you_ perfection already.--But hush!--not a word,if you please]
 [It seemed an unnecessary caution; Jane was wanting to give her words,not to Mrs. Elton, but to Miss Woodhouse, as the latter plainly saw.The wish of distinguishing her, as far as civility permitted, was veryevident, though it could not often proceed beyond a look.Mr. Elton made his appearance. His lady greeted him with some of hersparkling vivacity]
 [Very pretty, sir, upon my word; to send me on here, to be anencumbrance to my friends, so long before you vouchsafe to come!--Butyou knew what a dutiful creature you had to deal with. You knew I shouldnot stir till my lord and master appeared.--Here have I been sittingthis hour, giving these young ladies a sample of true conjugalobedience--for who can say, you know, how soon it may be wanted?"Mr. Elton was so hot and tired, that all this wit seemed thrown away.His civilities to the other ladies must be paid; but his subsequentobject was to lament over himself for the heat he was suffering, and thewalk he had had for nothing]
 [When I got to Donwell," said he, "Knightley could not be found. Veryodd! very unaccountable! after the note I sent him this morning, and themessage he returned, that he should certainly be at home till one]
 ["Donwell!" cried his wife.--"My dear Mr. E., you have not been toDonwell!--You mean the Crown; you come from the meeting at the Crown]
 ["No, no, that's to-morrow; and I particularly wanted to see Knightleyto-day on that very account.--Such a dreadful broiling morning!--I wentover the fields too--(speaking in a tone of great ill-usage,) which madeit so much the worse. And then not to find him at home! I assure youI am not at all pleased. And no apology left, no message for me. Thehousekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected.--Veryextraordinary!--And nobody knew at all which way he was gone. Perhapsto Hartfield, perhaps to the Abbey Mill, perhaps into his woods.--MissWoodhouse, this is not like our friend Knightley!--Can you explain it?"Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary,indeed, and that she had not a syllable to say for him]
 [I cannot imagine," said Mrs. Elton, (feeling the indignity as a wifeought to do,) "I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you, ofall people in the world! The very last person whom one should expect tobe forgotten!--My dear Mr. E., he must have left a message for you, I amsure he must.--Not even Knightley could be so very eccentric;--and hisservants forgot it. Depend upon it, that was the case: and very likelyto happen with the Donwell servants, who are all, I have often observed,extremely awkward and remiss.--I am sure I would not have such acreature as his Harry stand at our sideboard for any consideration. Andas for Mrs. Hodges, Wright holds her very cheap indeed.--She promisedWright a receipt, and never sent it]
 ["I met William Larkins," continued Mr. Elton, "as I got near the house,and he told me I should not find his master at home, but I did notbelieve him.--William seemed rather out of humour. He did not know whatwas come to his master lately, he said, but he could hardly ever get thespeech of him. I have nothing to do with William's wants, but it reallyis of very great importance that _I_ should see Knightley to-day; and itbecomes a matter, therefore, of very serious inconvenience that I shouldhave had this hot walk to no purpose]
 [Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly. Inall probability she was at this very time waited for there; and Mr.Knightley might be preserved from sinking deeper in aggression towardsMr. Elton, if not towards William Larkins.She was pleased, on taking leave, to find Miss Fairfax determined toattend her out of the room, to go with her even downstairs; it gave heran opportunity which she immediately made use of, to say,"It is as well, perhaps, that I have not had the possibility. Had younot been surrounded by other friends, I might have been tempted tointroduce a subject, to ask questions, to speak more openly than mighthave been strictly correct.--I feel that I should certainly have beenimpertinent]
 ["Oh!" cried Jane, with a blush and an hesitation which Emma thoughtinfinitely more becoming to her than all the elegance of all her usualcomposure--"there would have been no danger. The danger would havebeen of my wearying you. You could not have gratified me more thanby expressing an interest--. Indeed, Miss Woodhouse, (speaking morecollectedly,) with the consciousness which I have of misconduct, verygreat misconduct, it is particularly consoling to me to know that thoseof my friends, whose good opinion is most worth preserving, are notdisgusted to such a degree as to--I have not time for half that I couldwish to say. I long to make apologies, excuses, to urge something formyself. I feel it so very due. But, unfortunately--in short, if yourcompassion does not stand my friend--""Oh! you are too scrupulous, indeed you are," cried Emma warmly, andtaking her hand. "You owe me no apologies; and every body to whom youmight be supposed to owe them, is so perfectly satisfied, so delightedeven--""You are very kind, but I know what my manners were to you.--Socold and artificial!--I had always a part to act.--It was a life ofdeceit!--I know that I must have disgusted you]
 ["Pray say no more. I feel that all the apologies should be on my side.Let us forgive each other at once. We must do whatever is to be donequickest, and I think our feelings will lose no time there. I hope youhave pleasant accounts from Windsor?""Very]
 ["And the next news, I suppose, will be, that we are to lose you--just asI begin to know you]
 ["Oh! as to all that, of course nothing can be thought of yet. I am heretill claimed by Colonel and Mrs. Campbell]
 ["Nothing can be actually settled yet, perhaps," replied Emma,smiling--"but, excuse me, it must be thought of]
 [The smile was returned as Jane answered,"You are very right; it has been thought of. And I will own to you, (Iam sure it will be safe), that so far as our living with Mr. Churchillat Enscombe, it is settled. There must be three months, at least, ofdeep mourning; but when they are over, I imagine there will be nothingmore to wait for]
 ["Thank you, thank you.--This is just what I wanted to be assuredof.--Oh! if you knew how much I love every thing that is decided andopen!--Good-bye, good-bye]
 [CHAPTER XVIIMrs. Weston's friends were all made happy by her safety; and if thesatisfaction of her well-doing could be increased to Emma, it was byknowing her to be the mother of a little girl. She had been decided inwishing for a Miss Weston. She would not acknowledge that it was withany view of making a match for her, hereafter, with either of Isabella'ssons; but she was convinced that a daughter would suit both fatherand mother best. It would be a great comfort to Mr. Weston, as he grewolder--and even Mr. Weston might be growing older ten years hence--tohave his fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense, the freaksand the fancies of a child never banished from home; and Mrs. Weston--noone could doubt that a daughter would be most to her; and it would bequite a pity that any one who so well knew how to teach, should not havetheir powers in exercise again]
 [She has had the advantage, you know, of practising on me," shecontinued--"like La Baronne d'Almane on La Comtesse d'Ostalis, in Madamede Genlis' Adelaide and Theodore, and we shall now see her own littleAdelaide educated on a more perfect plan]
 ["That is," replied Mr. Knightley, "she will indulge her even more thanshe did you, and believe that she does not indulge her at all. It willbe the only difference]
 ["Poor child!" cried Emma; "at that rate, what will become of her?""Nothing very bad.--The fate of thousands. She will be disagreeablein infancy, and correct herself as she grows older. I am losing all mybitterness against spoilt children, my dearest Emma. I, who am owing allmy happiness to _you_, would not it be horrible ingratitude in me to besevere on them?"Emma laughed, and replied: "But I had the assistance of all yourendeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people. I doubt whethermy own sense would have corrected me without it]
 ["Do you?--I have no doubt. Nature gave you understanding:--Miss Taylorgave you principles. You must have done well. My interference was quiteas likely to do harm as good. It was very natural for you to say, whatright has he to lecture me?--and I am afraid very natural for you tofeel that it was done in a disagreeable manner. I do not believe I didyou any good. The good was all to myself, by making you an object of thetenderest affection to me. I could not think about you so much withoutdoating on you, faults and all; and by dint of fancying so many errors,have been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at least]
 ["I am sure you were of use to me," cried Emma. "I was very ofteninfluenced rightly by you--oftener than I would own at the time. Iam very sure you did me good. And if poor little Anna Weston is to bespoiled, it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for heras you have done for me, except falling in love with her when she isthirteen]
 ["How often, when you were a girl, have you said to me, with one of yoursaucy looks--'Mr. Knightley, I am going to do so-and-so; papa says Imay, or I have Miss Taylor's leave'--something which, you knew, Idid not approve. In such cases my interference was giving you two badfeelings instead of one]
 ["What an amiable creature I was!--No wonder you should hold my speechesin such affectionate remembrance]
 ["'Mr. Knightley]
 [--You always called me, 'Mr. Knightley;' and, fromhabit, it has not so very formal a sound.--And yet it is formal. I wantyou to call me something else, but I do not know what]
 ["I remember once calling you 'George,' in one of my amiable fits, aboutten years ago. I did it because I thought it would offend you; but, asyou made no objection, I never did it again]
 ["And cannot you call me 'George' now?""Impossible!--I never can call you any thing but 'Mr. Knightley]
 [ Iwill not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs. Elton, bycalling you Mr. K.--But I will promise," she added presently, laughingand blushing--"I will promise to call you once by your Christian name.I do not say when, but perhaps you may guess where;--in the building inwhich N. takes M. for better, for worse]
 [Emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to one importantservice which his better sense would have rendered her, to theadvice which would have saved her from the worst of all her womanlyfollies--her wilful intimacy with Harriet Smith; but it was too tender asubject.--She could not enter on it.--Harriet was very seldom mentionedbetween them. This, on his side, might merely proceed from her not beingthought of; but Emma was rather inclined to attribute it to delicacy,and a suspicion, from some appearances, that their friendship weredeclining. She was aware herself, that, parting under any othercircumstances, they certainly should have corresponded more, and thather intelligence would not have rested, as it now almost wholly did, onIsabella's letters. He might observe that it was so. The pain of beingobliged to practise concealment towards him, was very little inferior tothe pain of having made Harriet unhappy.Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as could beexpected; on her first arrival she had thought her out of spirits, whichappeared perfectly natural, as there was a dentist to be consulted; but,since that business had been over, she did not appear to find Harrietdifferent from what she had known her before.--Isabella, to be sure,was no very quick observer; yet if Harriet had not been equal to playingwith the children, it would not have escaped her. Emma's comforts andhopes were most agreeably carried on, by Harriet's being to stay longer;her fortnight was likely to be a month at least. Mr. and Mrs. JohnKnightley were to come down in August, and she was invited to remaintill they could bring her back]
 [John does not even mention your friend," said Mr. Knightley. "Here ishis answer, if you like to see it]
 [It was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage. Emmaaccepted it with a very eager hand, with an impatience all alive to knowwhat he would say about it, and not at all checked by hearing that herfriend was unmentioned]
 [John enters like a brother into my happiness," continued Mr. Knightley,"but he is no complimenter; and though I well know him to have,likewise, a most brotherly affection for you, he is so far from makingflourishes, that any other young woman might think him rather cool inher praise. But I am not afraid of your seeing what he writes]
 ["He writes like a sensible man," replied Emma, when she had read theletter. "I honour his sincerity. It is very plain that he considers thegood fortune of the engagement as all on my side, but that he is notwithout hope of my growing, in time, as worthy of your affection, asyou think me already. Had he said any thing to bear a differentconstruction, I should not have believed him]
 ["My Emma, he means no such thing. He only means--""He and I should differ very little in our estimation of the two,"interrupted she, with a sort of serious smile--"much less, perhaps, thanhe is aware of, if we could enter without ceremony or reserve on thesubject]
 ["Emma, my dear Emma--""Oh!" she cried with more thorough gaiety, "if you fancy your brotherdoes not do me justice, only wait till my dear father is in the secret,and hear his opinion. Depend upon it, he will be much farther from doing_you_ justice. He will think all the happiness, all the advantage, onyour side of the question; all the merit on mine. I wish I may notsink into 'poor Emma' with him at once.--His tender compassion towardsoppressed worth can go no farther]
 ["Ah!" he cried, "I wish your father might be half as easily convinced asJohn will be, of our having every right that equal worth can give, to behappy together. I am amused by one part of John's letter--did you noticeit?--where he says, that my information did not take him wholly bysurprize, that he was rather in expectation of hearing something of thekind]
 ["If I understand your brother, he only means so far as your havingsome thoughts of marrying. He had no idea of me. He seems perfectlyunprepared for that]
 ["Yes, yes--but I am amused that he should have seen so far into myfeelings. What has he been judging by?--I am not conscious of anydifference in my spirits or conversation that could prepare him atthis time for my marrying any more than at another.--But it was so, Isuppose. I dare say there was a difference when I was staying with themthe other day. I believe I did not play with the children quite so muchas usual. I remember one evening the poor boys saying, 'Uncle seemsalways tired now]
 ["The time was coming when the news must spread farther, and otherpersons' reception of it tried. As soon as Mrs. Weston was sufficientlyrecovered to admit Mr. Woodhouse's visits, Emma having it in view thather gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause, resolved first toannounce it at home, and then at Randalls.--But how to break it to herfather at last!--She had bound herself to do it, in such an hour of Mr.Knightley's absence, or when it came to the point her heart would havefailed her, and she must have put it off; but Mr. Knightley was to comeat such a time, and follow up the beginning she was to make.--She wasforced to speak, and to speak cheerfully too. She must not make it amore decided subject of misery to him, by a melancholy tone herself.She must not appear to think it a misfortune.--With all the spirits shecould command, she prepared him first for something strange, and then,in a few words, said, that if his consent and approbation could beobtained--which, she trusted, would be attended with no difficulty,since it was a plan to promote the happiness of all--she and Mr.Knightley meant to marry; by which means Hartfield would receive theconstant addition of that person's company whom she knew he loved, nextto his daughters and Mrs. Weston, best in the world.Poor man!--it was at first a considerable shock to him, and he triedearnestly to dissuade her from it. She was reminded, more than once, ofhaving always said she would never marry, and assured that it would bea great deal better for her to remain single; and told of poor Isabella,and poor Miss Taylor.--But it would not do. Emma hung about himaffectionately, and smiled, and said it must be so; and that he mustnot class her with Isabella and Mrs. Weston, whose marriages taking themfrom Hartfield, had, indeed, made a melancholy change: but she was notgoing from Hartfield; she should be always there; she was introducingno change in their numbers or their comforts but for the better; and shewas very sure that he would be a great deal the happier for having Mr.Knightley always at hand, when he were once got used to the idea.--Didhe not love Mr. Knightley very much?--He would not deny that he did,she was sure.--Whom did he ever want to consult on business but Mr.Knightley?--Who was so useful to him, who so ready to write his letters,who so glad to assist him?--Who so cheerful, so attentive, so attachedto him?--Would not he like to have him always on the spot?--Yes. Thatwas all very true. Mr. Knightley could not be there too often; he shouldbe glad to see him every day;--but they did see him every day as itwas.--Why could not they go on as they had done?Mr. Woodhouse could not be soon reconciled; but the worst was overcome,the idea was given; time and continual repetition must do the rest.--ToEmma's entreaties and assurances succeeded Mr. Knightley's, whose fondpraise of her gave the subject even a kind of welcome; and he was soonused to be talked to by each, on every fair occasion.--They had allthe assistance which Isabella could give, by letters of the strongestapprobation; and Mrs. Weston was ready, on the first meeting, toconsider the subject in the most serviceable light--first, as a settled,and, secondly, as a good one--well aware of the nearly equal importanceof the two recommendations to Mr. Woodhouse's mind.--It was agreedupon, as what was to be; and every body by whom he was used to beguided assuring him that it would be for his happiness; and having somefeelings himself which almost admitted it, he began to think that sometime or other--in another year or two, perhaps--it might not be so verybad if the marriage did take place.Mrs. Weston was acting no part, feigning no feelings in all that shesaid to him in favour of the event.--She had been extremely surprized,never more so, than when Emma first opened the affair to her; but shesaw in it only increase of happiness to all, and had no scruple inurging him to the utmost.--She had such a regard for Mr. Knightley, asto think he deserved even her dearest Emma; and it was in every respectso proper, suitable, and unexceptionable a connexion, and in onerespect, one point of the highest importance, so peculiarly eligible,so singularly fortunate, that now it seemed as if Emma could not safelyhave attached herself to any other creature, and that she had herselfbeen the stupidest of beings in not having thought of it, and wished itlong ago.--How very few of those men in a rank of life to address Emmawould have renounced their own home for Hartfield! And who but Mr.Knightley could know and bear with Mr. Woodhouse, so as to make suchan arrangement desirable!--The difficulty of disposing of poor Mr.Woodhouse had been always felt in her husband's plans and her own, fora marriage between Frank and Emma. How to settle the claims of Enscombeand Hartfield had been a continual impediment--less acknowledged by Mr.Weston than by herself--but even he had never been able to finishthe subject better than by saying--"Those matters will take care ofthemselves; the young people will find a way]
 [ But here there wasnothing to be shifted off in a wild speculation on the future. It wasall right, all open, all equal. No sacrifice on any side worth the name.It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself, and withoutone real, rational difficulty to oppose or delay it.Mrs. Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulging in such reflectionsas these, was one of the happiest women in the world. If any thing couldincrease her delight, it was perceiving that the baby would soon haveoutgrown its first set of caps.The news was universally a surprize wherever it spread; and Mr. Westonhad his five minutes share of it; but five minutes were enough tofamiliarise the idea to his quickness of mind.--He saw the advantagesof the match, and rejoiced in them with all the constancy of his wife;but the wonder of it was very soon nothing; and by the end of an hour hewas not far from believing that he had always foreseen it]
 [It is to be a secret, I conclude," said he. "These matters are always asecret, till it is found out that every body knows them. Only let me betold when I may speak out.--I wonder whether Jane has any suspicion]
 [He went to Highbury the next morning, and satisfied himself on thatpoint. He told her the news. Was not she like a daughter, his eldestdaughter?--he must tell her; and Miss Bates being present, it passed,of course, to Mrs. Cole, Mrs. Perry, and Mrs. Elton, immediatelyafterwards. It was no more than the principals were prepared for; theyhad calculated from the time of its being known at Randalls, how soon itwould be over Highbury; and were thinking of themselves, as the eveningwonder in many a family circle, with great sagacity.In general, it was a very well approved match. Some might think him, andothers might think her, the most in luck. One set might recommend theirall removing to Donwell, and leaving Hartfield for the John Knightleys;and another might predict disagreements among their servants; but yet,upon the whole, there was no serious objection raised, except in onehabitation, the Vicarage.--There, the surprize was not softened by anysatisfaction. Mr. Elton cared little about it, compared with his wife;he only hoped "the young lady's pride would now be contented;" andsupposed "she had always meant to catch Knightley if she could;" and,on the point of living at Hartfield, could daringly exclaim, "Ratherhe than I!"--But Mrs. Elton was very much discomposed indeed.--"PoorKnightley! poor fellow!--sad business for him]
 [--She was extremelyconcerned; for, though very eccentric, he had a thousand goodqualities.--How could he be so taken in?--Did not think him at all inlove--not in the least.--Poor Knightley!--There would be an end of allpleasant intercourse with him.--How happy he had been to come and dinewith them whenever they asked him! But that would be all over now.--Poorfellow!--No more exploring parties to Donwell made for _her_. Oh!no; there would be a Mrs. Knightley to throw cold water on everything.--Extremely disagreeable! But she was not at all sorry thatshe had abused the housekeeper the other day.--Shocking plan, livingtogether. It would never do. She knew a family near Maple Grove whohad tried it, and been obliged to separate before the end of the firstquarter.CHAPTER XVIIITime passed on. A few more to-morrows, and the party from London wouldbe arriving. It was an alarming change; and Emma was thinking of it onemorning, as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve her, whenMr. Knightley came in, and distressing thoughts were put by. After thefirst chat of pleasure he was silent; and then, in a graver tone, beganwith,"I have something to tell you, Emma; some news]
 ["Good or bad?" said she, quickly, looking up in his face]
 [I do not know which it ought to be called]
 ["Oh! good I am sure.--I see it in your countenance. You are trying notto smile]
 ["I am afraid," said he, composing his features, "I am very much afraid,my dear Emma, that you will not smile when you hear it]
 ["Indeed! but why so?--I can hardly imagine that any thing which pleasesor amuses you, should not please and amuse me too]
 ["There is one subject," he replied, "I hope but one, on which we do notthink alike]
 [ He paused a moment, again smiling, with his eyes fixed onher face. "Does nothing occur to you?--Do not you recollect?--HarrietSmith]
 [Her cheeks flushed at the name, and she felt afraid of something, thoughshe knew not what]
 [Have you heard from her yourself this morning?" cried he. "You have, Ibelieve, and know the whole]
 ["No, I have not; I know nothing; pray tell me]
 ["You are prepared for the worst, I see--and very bad it is. HarrietSmith marries Robert Martin]
 [Emma gave a start, which did not seem like being prepared--and her eyes,in eager gaze, said, "No, this is impossible!" but her lips were closed]
 [It is so, indeed," continued Mr. Knightley; "I have it from RobertMartin himself. He left me not half an hour ago]
 [She was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement]
 [You like it, my Emma, as little as I feared.--I wish our opinions werethe same. But in time they will. Time, you may be sure, will make oneor the other of us think differently; and, in the meanwhile, we need nottalk much on the subject]
 ["You mistake me, you quite mistake me," she replied, exerting herself]
 [It is not that such a circumstance would now make me unhappy, but Icannot believe it. It seems an impossibility!--You cannot mean to say,that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin. You cannot mean that hehas even proposed to her again--yet. You only mean, that he intends it]
 ["I mean that he has done it," answered Mr. Knightley, with smiling butdetermined decision, "and been accepted]
 ["Good God!" she cried.--"Well!"--Then having recourse to her workbasket,in excuse for leaning down her face, and concealing all the exquisitefeelings of delight and entertainment which she knew she must beexpressing, she added, "Well, now tell me every thing; make thisintelligible to me. How, where, when?--Let me know it all. I never wasmore surprized--but it does not make me unhappy, I assure you.--How--howhas it been possible?""It is a very simple story. He went to town on business three days ago,and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting to sendto John.--He delivered these papers to John, at his chambers, and wasasked by him to join their party the same evening to Astley's. They weregoing to take the two eldest boys to Astley's. The party was to be ourbrother and sister, Henry, John--and Miss Smith. My friend Robert couldnot resist. They called for him in their way; were all extremely amused;and my brother asked him to dine with them the next day--which hedid--and in the course of that visit (as I understand) he found anopportunity of speaking to Harriet; and certainly did not speakin vain.--She made him, by her acceptance, as happy even as he isdeserving. He came down by yesterday's coach, and was with me thismorning immediately after breakfast, to report his proceedings, firston my affairs, and then on his own. This is all that I can relate ofthe how, where, and when. Your friend Harriet will make a muchlonger history when you see her.--She will give you all the minuteparticulars, which only woman's language can make interesting.--In ourcommunications we deal only in the great.--However, I must say, thatRobert Martin's heart seemed for _him_, and to _me_, very overflowing;and that he did mention, without its being much to the purpose, thaton quitting their box at Astley's, my brother took charge of Mrs. JohnKnightley and little John, and he followed with Miss Smith and Henry;and that at one time they were in such a crowd, as to make Miss Smithrather uneasy]
 [He stopped.--Emma dared not attempt any immediate reply. To speak, shewas sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness.She must wait a moment, or he would think her mad. Her silence disturbedhim; and after observing her a little while, he added,"Emma, my love, you said that this circumstance would not now make youunhappy; but I am afraid it gives you more pain than you expected. Hissituation is an evil--but you must consider it as what satisfies yourfriend; and I will answer for your thinking better and better of himas you know him more. His good sense and good principles would delightyou.--As far as the man is concerned, you could not wish your friendin better hands. His rank in society I would alter if I could, which issaying a great deal I assure you, Emma.--You laugh at me about WilliamLarkins; but I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin]
 [He wanted her to look up and smile; and having now brought herself notto smile too broadly--she did--cheerfully answering,"You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match. I thinkHarriet is doing extremely well. _Her_ connexions may be worse than_his_. In respectability of character, there can be no doubt that theyare. I have been silent from surprize merely, excessive surprize. Youcannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me! how peculiarly unpreparedI was!--for I had reason to believe her very lately more determinedagainst him, much more, than she was before]
 ["You ought to know your friend best," replied Mr. Knightley; "but Ishould say she was a good-tempered, soft-hearted girl, not likely to bevery, very determined against any young man who told her he loved her]
 [Emma could not help laughing as she answered, "Upon my word, I believeyou know her quite as well as I do.--But, Mr. Knightley, are youperfectly sure that she has absolutely and downright _accepted_ him.I could suppose she might in time--but can she already?--Did not youmisunderstand him?--You were both talking of other things; of business,shows of cattle, or new drills--and might not you, in the confusion ofso many subjects, mistake him?--It was not Harriet's hand that he wascertain of--it was the dimensions of some famous ox]
 [The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr. Knightley and RobertMartin was, at this moment, so strong to Emma's feelings, and so strongwas the recollection of all that had so recently passed on Harriet'sside, so fresh the sound of those words, spoken with such emphasis,"No, I hope I know better than to think of Robert Martin," that she wasreally expecting the intelligence to prove, in some measure, premature.It could not be otherwise]
 [Do you dare say this?" cried Mr. Knightley. "Do you dare to suppose meso great a blockhead, as not to know what a man is talking of?--What doyou deserve?""Oh! I always deserve the best treatment, because I never put up withany other; and, therefore, you must give me a plain, direct answer. Areyou quite sure that you understand the terms on which Mr. Martin andHarriet now are?""I am quite sure," he replied, speaking very distinctly, "that hetold me she had accepted him; and that there was no obscurity, nothingdoubtful, in the words he used; and I think I can give you a proof thatit must be so. He asked my opinion as to what he was now to do. He knewof no one but Mrs. Goddard to whom he could apply for information ofher relations or friends. Could I mention any thing more fit to be done,than to go to Mrs. Goddard? I assured him that I could not. Then, hesaid, he would endeavour to see her in the course of this day]
 ["I am perfectly satisfied," replied Emma, with the brightest smiles,"and most sincerely wish them happy]
 ["You are materially changed since we talked on this subject before]
 ["I hope so--for at that time I was a fool]
 ["And I am changed also; for I am now very willing to grant you allHarriet's good qualities. I have taken some pains for your sake, and forRobert Martin's sake, (whom I have always had reason to believe as muchin love with her as ever,) to get acquainted with her. I have oftentalked to her a good deal. You must have seen that I did. Sometimes,indeed, I have thought you were half suspecting me of pleading poorMartin's cause, which was never the case; but, from all my observations,I am convinced of her being an artless, amiable girl, with very goodnotions, very seriously good principles, and placing her happiness inthe affections and utility of domestic life.--Much of this, I have nodoubt, she may thank you for]
 ["Me!" cried Emma, shaking her head.--"Ah! poor Harriet!"She checked herself, however, and submitted quietly to a little morepraise than she deserved.Their conversation was soon afterwards closed by the entrance of herfather. She was not sorry. She wanted to be alone. Her mind was in astate of flutter and wonder, which made it impossible for her to becollected. She was in dancing, singing, exclaiming spirits; and till shehad moved about, and talked to herself, and laughed and reflected, shecould be fit for nothing rational.Her father's business was to announce James's being gone out to put thehorses to, preparatory to their now daily drive to Randalls; and shehad, therefore, an immediate excuse for disappearing.The joy, the gratitude, the exquisite delight of her sensations may beimagined. The sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the prospect ofHarriet's welfare, she was really in danger of becoming too happy forsecurity.--What had she to wish for? Nothing, but to grow more worthy ofhim, whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her own.Nothing, but that the lessons of her past folly might teach her humilityand circumspection in future.Serious she was, very serious in her thankfulness, and in herresolutions; and yet there was no preventing a laugh, sometimes in thevery midst of them. She must laugh at such a close! Such an end of thedoleful disappointment of five weeks back! Such a heart--such a Harriet!Now there would be pleasure in her returning--Every thing would be apleasure. It would be a great pleasure to know Robert Martin.High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities, was thereflection that all necessity of concealment from Mr. Knightley wouldsoon be over. The disguise, equivocation, mystery, so hateful to her topractise, might soon be over. She could now look forward to giving himthat full and perfect confidence which her disposition was most ready towelcome as a duty.In the gayest and happiest spirits she set forward with her father; notalways listening, but always agreeing to what he said; and, whether inspeech or silence, conniving at the comfortable persuasion of hisbeing obliged to go to Randalls every day, or poor Mrs. Weston would bedisappointed.They arrived.--Mrs. Weston was alone in the drawing-room:--but hardlyhad they been told of the baby, and Mr. Woodhouse received the thanksfor coming, which he asked for, when a glimpse was caught through theblind, of two figures passing near the window]
 [It is Frank and Miss Fairfax," said Mrs. Weston. "I was just going totell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrive this morning. Hestays till to-morrow, and Miss Fairfax has been persuaded to spend theday with us.--They are coming in, I hope]
 [In half a minute they were in the room. Emma was extremely glad tosee him--but there was a degree of confusion--a number of embarrassingrecollections on each side. They met readily and smiling, but with aconsciousness which at first allowed little to be said; and having allsat down again, there was for some time such a blank in the circle, thatEmma began to doubt whether the wish now indulged, which she had longfelt, of seeing Frank Churchill once more, and of seeing him with Jane,would yield its proportion of pleasure. When Mr. Weston joined theparty, however, and when the baby was fetched, there was no longer awant of subject or animation--or of courage and opportunity for FrankChurchill to draw near her and say,"I have to thank you, Miss Woodhouse, for a very kind forgiving messagein one of Mrs. Weston's letters. I hope time has not made you lesswilling to pardon. I hope you do not retract what you then said]
 ["No, indeed," cried Emma, most happy to begin, "not in the least. I amparticularly glad to see and shake hands with you--and to give you joyin person]
 [He thanked her with all his heart, and continued some time to speak withserious feeling of his gratitude and happiness]
 [Is not she looking well?" said he, turning his eyes towards Jane]
 [Better than she ever used to do?--You see how my father and Mrs. Westondoat upon her]
 [But his spirits were soon rising again, and with laughing eyes, aftermentioning the expected return of the Campbells, he named the name ofDixon.--Emma blushed, and forbade its being pronounced in her hearing]
 [I can never think of it," she cried, "without extreme shame]
 ["The shame," he answered, "is all mine, or ought to be. But is itpossible that you had no suspicion?--I mean of late. Early, I know, youhad none]
 ["I never had the smallest, I assure you]
 ["That appears quite wonderful. I was once very near--and I wish Ihad--it would have been better. But though I was always doing wrongthings, they were very bad wrong things, and such as did me noservice.--It would have been a much better transgression had I brokenthe bond of secrecy and told you every thing]
 ["It is not now worth a regret," said Emma]
 [I have some hope," resumed he, "of my uncle's being persuaded to pay avisit at Randalls; he wants to be introduced to her. When the Campbellsare returned, we shall meet them in London, and continue there, I trust,till we may carry her northward.--But now, I am at such a distance fromher--is not it hard, Miss Woodhouse?--Till this morning, we have notonce met since the day of reconciliation. Do not you pity me?"Emma spoke her pity so very kindly, that with a sudden accession of gaythought, he cried,"Ah! by the bye," then sinking his voice, and looking demure for themoment--"I hope Mr. Knightley is well?" He paused.--She coloured andlaughed.--"I know you saw my letter, and think you may remember my wishin your favour. Let me return your congratulations.--I assure you thatI have heard the news with the warmest interest and satisfaction.--He isa man whom I cannot presume to praise]
 [Emma was delighted, and only wanted him to go on in the same style; buthis mind was the next moment in his own concerns and with his own Jane,and his next words were,"Did you ever see such a skin?--such smoothness! such delicacy!--andyet without being actually fair.--One cannot call her fair. It is amost uncommon complexion, with her dark eye-lashes and hair--a mostdistinguishing complexion! So peculiarly the lady in it.--Just colourenough for beauty]
 ["I have always admired her complexion," replied Emma, archly; "butdo not I remember the time when you found fault with her for being sopale?--When we first began to talk of her.--Have you quite forgotten?""Oh! no--what an impudent dog I was!--How could I dare--"But he laughed so heartily at the recollection, that Emma could not helpsaying,"I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time, youhad very great amusement in tricking us all.--I am sure you had.--I amsure it was a consolation to you]
 ["Oh! no, no, no--how can you suspect me of such a thing? I was the mostmiserable wretch!""Not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth. I am sure it was asource of high entertainment to you, to feel that you were taking usall in.--Perhaps I am the readier to suspect, because, to tell you thetruth, I think it might have been some amusement to myself in the samesituation. I think there is a little likeness between us]
 [He bowed]
 [If not in our dispositions," she presently added, with a look of truesensibility, "there is a likeness in our destiny; the destiny which bidsfair to connect us with two characters so much superior to our own]
 ["True, true," he answered, warmly. "No, not true on your side. You canhave no superior, but most true on mine.--She is a complete angel. Lookat her. Is not she an angel in every gesture? Observe the turn of herthroat. Observe her eyes, as she is looking up at my father.--You willbe glad to hear (inclining his head, and whispering seriously) that myuncle means to give her all my aunt's jewels. They are to be new set.I am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head. Will not it bebeautiful in her dark hair?""Very beautiful, indeed," replied Emma; and she spoke so kindly, that hegratefully burst out,"How delighted I am to see you again! and to see you in such excellentlooks!--I would not have missed this meeting for the world. I shouldcertainly have called at Hartfield, had you failed to come]
 [The others had been talking of the child, Mrs. Weston giving an accountof a little alarm she had been under, the evening before, from theinfant's appearing not quite well. She believed she had been foolish,but it had alarmed her, and she had been within half a minute of sendingfor Mr. Perry. Perhaps she ought to be ashamed, but Mr. Weston had beenalmost as uneasy as herself.--In ten minutes, however, the child hadbeen perfectly well again. This was her history; and particularlyinteresting it was to Mr. Woodhouse, who commended her very much forthinking of sending for Perry, and only regretted that she had not doneit. "She should always send for Perry, if the child appeared in theslightest degree disordered, were it only for a moment. She could not betoo soon alarmed, nor send for Perry too often. It was a pity, perhaps,that he had not come last night; for, though the child seemed well now,very well considering, it would probably have been better if Perry hadseen it]
 [Frank Churchill caught the name]
 [Perry!" said he to Emma, and trying, as he spoke, to catch MissFairfax's eye. "My friend Mr. Perry! What are they saying about Mr.Perry?--Has he been here this morning?--And how does he travel now?--Hashe set up his carriage?"Emma soon recollected, and understood him; and while she joined in thelaugh, it was evident from Jane's countenance that she too was reallyhearing him, though trying to seem deaf]
 [Such an extraordinary dream of mine!" he cried. "I can never think ofit without laughing.--She hears us, she hears us, Miss Woodhouse. I seeit in her cheek, her smile, her vain attempt to frown. Look at her. Donot you see that, at this instant, the very passage of her own letter,which sent me the report, is passing under her eye--that the wholeblunder is spread before her--that she can attend to nothing else,though pretending to listen to the others?"Jane was forced to smile completely, for a moment; and the smile partlyremained as she turned towards him, and said in a conscious, low, yetsteady voice,"How you can bear such recollections, is astonishing to me!--They_will_ sometimes obtrude--but how you can court them!"He had a great deal to say in return, and very entertainingly; butEmma's feelings were chiefly with Jane, in the argument; and on leavingRandalls, and falling naturally into a comparison of the two men, shefelt, that pleased as she had been to see Frank Churchill, and reallyregarding him as she did with friendship, she had never been moresensible of Mr. Knightley's high superiority of character. The happinessof this most happy day, received its completion, in the animatedcontemplation of his worth which this comparison produced.CHAPTER XIXIf Emma had still, at intervals, an anxious feeling for Harriet, amomentary doubt of its being possible for her to be really cured of herattachment to Mr. Knightley, and really able to accept another man fromunbiased inclination, it was not long that she had to suffer from therecurrence of any such uncertainty. A very few days brought the partyfrom London, and she had no sooner an opportunity of being one houralone with Harriet, than she became perfectly satisfied--unaccountableas it was!--that Robert Martin had thoroughly supplanted Mr. Knightley,and was now forming all her views of happiness.Harriet was a little distressed--did look a little foolish at first:but having once owned that she had been presumptuous and silly, andself-deceived, before, her pain and confusion seemed to die away withthe words, and leave her without a care for the past, and with thefullest exultation in the present and future; for, as to her friend'sapprobation, Emma had instantly removed every fear of that nature, bymeeting her with the most unqualified congratulations.--Harriet wasmost happy to give every particular of the evening at Astley's, and thedinner the next day; she could dwell on it all with the utmost delight.But what did such particulars explain?--The fact was, as Emma could nowacknowledge, that Harriet had always liked Robert Martin; and that hiscontinuing to love her had been irresistible.--Beyond this, it must everbe unintelligible to Emma.The event, however, was most joyful; and every day was giving her freshreason for thinking so.--Harriet's parentage became known. She provedto be the daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to afford her thecomfortable maintenance which had ever been hers, and decent enough tohave always wished for concealment.--Such was the blood of gentilitywhich Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for!--It was likely tobe as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a gentleman: but whata connexion had she been preparing for Mr. Knightley--or for theChurchills--or even for Mr. Elton!--The stain of illegitimacy,unbleached by nobility or wealth, would have been a stain indeed.No objection was raised on the father's side; the young man was treatedliberally; it was all as it should be: and as Emma became acquaintedwith Robert Martin, who was now introduced at Hartfield, she fullyacknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and worth which couldbid fairest for her little friend. She had no doubt of Harriet'shappiness with any good-tempered man; but with him, and in the home heoffered, there would be the hope of more, of security, stability, andimprovement. She would be placed in the midst of those who loved her,and who had better sense than herself; retired enough for safety,and occupied enough for cheerfulness. She would be never led intotemptation, nor left for it to find her out. She would be respectableand happy; and Emma admitted her to be the luckiest creature in theworld, to have created so steady and persevering an affection in such aman;--or, if not quite the luckiest, to yield only to herself.Harriet, necessarily drawn away by her engagements with the Martins,was less and less at Hartfield; which was not to be regretted.--Theintimacy between her and Emma must sink; their friendship must changeinto a calmer sort of goodwill; and, fortunately, what ought to be,and must be, seemed already beginning, and in the most gradual, naturalmanner.Before the end of September, Emma attended Harriet to church, and sawher hand bestowed on Robert Martin with so complete a satisfaction, asno remembrances, even connected with Mr. Elton as he stood before them,could impair.--Perhaps, indeed, at that time she scarcely saw Mr. Elton,but as the clergyman whose blessing at the altar might next fall onherself.--Robert Martin and Harriet Smith, the latest couple engaged ofthe three, were the first to be married.Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury, and was restored to thecomforts of her beloved home with the Campbells.--The Mr. Churchillswere also in town; and they were only waiting for November.The intermediate month was the one fixed on, as far as they dared, byEmma and Mr. Knightley.--They had determined that their marriage oughtto be concluded while John and Isabella were still at Hartfield, toallow them the fortnight's absence in a tour to the seaside, which wasthe plan.--John and Isabella, and every other friend, were agreed inapproving it. But Mr. Woodhouse--how was Mr. Woodhouse to be inducedto consent?--he, who had never yet alluded to their marriage but as adistant event.When first sounded on the subject, he was so miserable, that they werealmost hopeless.--A second allusion, indeed, gave less pain.--Hebegan to think it was to be, and that he could not prevent it--a verypromising step of the mind on its way to resignation. Still, however, hewas not happy. Nay, he appeared so much otherwise, that his daughter'scourage failed. She could not bear to see him suffering, to knowhim fancying himself neglected; and though her understanding almostacquiesced in the assurance of both the Mr. Knightleys, that whenonce the event were over, his distress would be soon over too, shehesitated--she could not proceed.In this state of suspense they were befriended, not by any suddenillumination of Mr. Woodhouse's mind, or any wonderful change of hisnervous system, but by the operation of the same system in anotherway.--Mrs. Weston's poultry-house was robbed one night of all herturkeys--evidently by the ingenuity of man. Other poultry-yards inthe neighbourhood also suffered.--Pilfering was _housebreaking_ to Mr.Woodhouse's fears.--He was very uneasy; and but for the sense of hisson-in-law's protection, would have been under wretched alarm everynight of his life. The strength, resolution, and presence of mind of theMr. Knightleys, commanded his fullest dependence. While either of themprotected him and his, Hartfield was safe.--But Mr. John Knightley mustbe in London again by the end of the first week in November.The result of this distress was, that, with a much more voluntary,cheerful consent than his daughter had ever presumed to hope for at themoment, she was able to fix her wedding-day--and Mr. Elton was calledon, within a month from the marriage of Mr. and Mrs. Robert Martin, tojoin the hands of Mr. Knightley and Miss Woodhouse.The wedding was very much like other weddings, where the parties haveno taste for finery or parade; and Mrs. Elton, from the particularsdetailed by her husband, thought it all extremely shabby, and veryinferior to her own.--"Very little white satin, very few lace veils; amost pitiful business!--Selina would stare when she heard of it]
 [--But,in spite of these deficiencies, the wishes, the hopes, the confidence,the predictions of the small band of true friends who witnessed theceremony, were fully answered in the perfect happiness of the union.FINISEnd of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Emma, by Jane Austen*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMMA ******** This file should be named 158.txt or 158.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/158/Produced by An Anonymous VolunteerUpdated editions will replace the previous one--the old editionswill be renamed.Creating the works from public domain print editions means that noone owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States withoutpermission and without paying copyright royalties]
 [Special rules,set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply tocopying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works toprotect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark]
 [ProjectGutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if youcharge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission]
 [If youdo not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with therules is very easy]
 [You may use this eBook for nearly any purposesuch as creation of derivative works, reports, performances andresearch]
 [They may be modified and printed and given away--you may dopractically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks]
 [Redistribution issubject to the trademark license, especially commercialredistribution.*** START: FULL LICENSE ***THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full ProjectGutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online athttp://gutenberg.org/license).Section 1]
 [General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works1.A]
 [By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement]
 [If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroyall copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by theterms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person orentity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B]
 ["Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark]
 [It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement]
 [There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement]
 [Seeparagraph 1.C below]
 [There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreementand help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks]
 [See paragraph 1.E below.1.C]
 [The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works]
 [Nearly all the individual works in thecollection are in the public domain in the United States]
 [If anindividual work is in the public domain in the United States and you arelocated in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you fromcopying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivativeworks based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenbergare removed]
 [Of course, we hope that you will support the ProjectGutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works byfreely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms ofthis agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated withthe work]
 [You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement bykeeping this work in the same format with its attached full ProjectGutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.1.D]
 [The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work]
 [Copyright laws in most countries are ina constant state of change]
 [If you are outside the United States, checkthe laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreementbefore downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing orcreating derivative works based on this work or any other ProjectGutenberg-tm work]
 [The Foundation makes no representations concerningthe copyright status of any work in any country outside the UnitedStates.1.E]
 [Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1]
 [The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediateaccess to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominentlywhenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,copied or distributed:This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever]
 [You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org1.E.2]
 [If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derivedfrom the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it isposted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copiedand distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any feesor charges]
 [If you are redistributing or providing access to a workwith the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on thework, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and theProject Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or1.E.9.1.E.3]
 [If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additionalterms imposed by the copyright holder]
 [Additional terms will be linkedto the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with thepermission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.1.E.4]
 [Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.1.E.5]
 [Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.1.E.6]
 [You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including anyword processing or hypertext form]
 [However, if you provide access to ordistribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official versionposted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide acopy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy uponrequest, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or otherform]
 [Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7]
 [Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8]
 [You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works providedthat- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes]
 [The fee is     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation]
 [Royalty payments     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax     returns]
 [Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation]
 [- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm     License]
 [You must require such a user to return or     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of     Project Gutenberg-tm works.- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days     of receipt of the work.- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.1.E.9]
 [If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work or group of works on different terms than are setforth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing fromboth the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and MichaelHart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark]
 [Contact theFoundation as set forth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1]
 [Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadpublic domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tmcollection]
 [Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate orcorrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectualproperty infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, acomputer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read byyour equipment.1.F.2]
 [LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees]
 [YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3]
 [YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3]
 [LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from]
 [If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium withyour written explanation]
 [The person or entity that provided you withthe defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of arefund]
 [If you received the work electronically, the person or entityproviding it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity toreceive the work electronically in lieu of a refund]
 [If the second copyis also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without furtheropportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4]
 [Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHERWARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TOWARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5]
 [Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates thelaw of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall beinterpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted bythe applicable state law]
 [The invalidity or unenforceability of anyprovision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.1.F.6]
 [INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordancewith this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you door cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tmwork, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to anyProject Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.Section  2]
 [Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tmProject Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computersincluding obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers]
 [It existsbecause of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations frompeople in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come]
 [In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundationand how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.Section 3]
 [Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary ArchiveFoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service]
 [The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541]
 [Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted athttp://pglaf.org/fundraising]
 [Contributions to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extentpermitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scatteredthroughout numerous locations]
 [Its business office is located at809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emailbusiness@pglaf.org]
 [Email contact links and up to date contactinformation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officialpage at http://pglaf.orgFor additional contact information:     Dr. Gregory B. Newby     Chief Executive and Director     gbnewby@pglaf.orgSection 4]
 [Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment]
 [Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates]
 [Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements]
 [We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance]
 [ToSEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for anyparticular state visit http://pglaf.orgWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States]
 [U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donationmethods and addresses]
 [Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donateSection 5]
 [General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tmconcept of a library of electronic works that could be freely sharedwith anyone]
 [For thirty years, he produced and distributed ProjectGutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.unless a copyright notice is included]
 [Thus, we do not necessarilykeep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:     http://www.gutenberg.orgThis Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.]
